clang/docs/ClangPlugins.rst, before:

=============
Clang Plugins
=============

Clang Plugins make it possible to run extra user defined actions during a
compilation. This document will provide a basic walkthrough of how to write and
run a Clang Plugin.

Introduction
============

Clang Plugins run FrontendActions over code. See the :doc:`FrontendAction
tutorial <RAVFrontendAction>` on how to write a ``FrontendAction`` using the
``RecursiveASTVisitor``. In this tutorial, we'll demonstrate how to write a
simple clang plugin.

Writing a ``PluginASTAction``
=============================

The main difference from writing normal ``FrontendActions`` is that you can
handle plugin command line options. The ``PluginASTAction`` base class declares
a ``ParseArgs`` method which you have to implement in your plugin.

.. code-block:: c++

  bool ParseArgs(const CompilerInstance &CI,
                 const std::vector<std::string>& args) {
    for (unsigned i = 0, e = args.size(); i != e; ++i) {
      if (args[i] == "-some-arg") {
        // Handle the command line argument.
      }
    }
    return true;
  }

Registering a plugin
====================

A plugin is loaded from a dynamic library at runtime by the compiler. To
register a plugin in a library, use ``FrontendPluginRegistry::Add<>``:

.. code-block:: c++

  static FrontendPluginRegistry::Add<MyPlugin> X("my-plugin-name", "my plugin description");

Defining pragmas
================

Plugins can also define pragmas by declaring a ``PragmaHandler`` and
registering it using ``PragmaHandlerRegistry::Add<>``:

.. code-block:: c++

  // Define a pragma handler for #pragma example_pragma
  class ExamplePragmaHandler : public PragmaHandler {
  public:
    ExamplePragmaHandler() : PragmaHandler("example_pragma") { }
    void HandlePragma(Preprocessor &PP, PragmaIntroducer Introducer,
                      Token &PragmaTok) {
      // Handle the pragma
    }
  };

  static PragmaHandlerRegistry::Add<ExamplePragmaHandler> Y("example_pragma","example pragma description");

Defining attributes
===================

Plugins can define attributes by declaring a ``ParsedAttrInfo`` and registering
it using ``ParsedAttrInfoRegister::Add<>``:

.. code-block:: c++

  class ExampleAttrInfo : public ParsedAttrInfo {
  public:
    ExampleAttrInfo() {
      Spellings.push_back({ParsedAttr::AS_GNU,"example"});
    }
    AttrHandling handleDeclAttribute(Sema &S, Decl *D,
                                     const ParsedAttr &Attr) const override {
      // Handle the attribute
      return AttributeApplied;
    }
  };

  static ParsedAttrInfoRegistry::Add<ExampleAttrInfo> Z("example_attr","example attribute description");

The members of ``ParsedAttrInfo`` that a plugin attribute must define are:

 * ``Spellings``, which must be populated with every `Spelling
   </doxygen/structclang_1_1ParsedAttrInfo_1_1Spelling.html>`_ of the
   attribute, each of which consists of an attribute syntax and how the
   attribute name is spelled for that syntax. If the syntax allows a scope then
   the spelling must be "scope::attr" if a scope is present or "::attr" if not.
 * ``handleDeclAttribute``, which is the function that applies the attribute to
   a declaration. It is responsible for checking that the attribute's arguments
   are valid, and typically applies the attribute by adding an ``Attr`` to the
   ``Decl``. It returns either ``AttributeApplied``, to indicate that the
   attribute was successfully applied, or ``AttributeNotApplied`` if it wasn't.

The members of ``ParsedAttrInfo`` that may need to be defined, depending on the
attribute, are:

 * ``NumArgs`` and ``OptArgs``, which set the number of required and optional
   arguments to the attribute.
 * ``diagAppertainsToDecl``, which checks if the attribute has been used on the
   right kind of declaration and issues a diagnostic if not.
 * ``diagLangOpts``, which checks if the attribute is permitted for the current
   language mode and issues a diagnostic if not.
 * ``existsInTarget``, which checks if the attribute is permitted for the given
   target.

To see a working example of an attribute plugin, see `the Attribute.cpp example
<https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/clang/examples/Attribute/Attribute.cpp>`_.

Putting it all together
=======================

Let's look at an example plugin that prints top-level function names.  This
example is checked into the clang repository; please take a look at
the `latest version of PrintFunctionNames.cpp
<https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/clang/examples/PrintFunctionNames/PrintFunctionNames.cpp>`_.

Running the plugin
==================


Using the cc1 command line
--------------------------

To run a plugin, the dynamic library containing the plugin registry must be
loaded via the `-load` command line option. This will load all plugins
that are registered, and you can select the plugins to run by specifying the
`-plugin` option. Additional parameters for the plugins can be passed with
`-plugin-arg-<plugin-name>`.

Note that those options must reach clang's cc1 process. There are two
ways to do so:

* Directly call the parsing process by using the `-cc1` option; this
  has the downside of not configuring the default header search paths, so
  you'll need to specify the full system path configuration on the command
  line.
* Use clang as usual, but prefix all arguments to the cc1 process with
  `-Xclang`.

For example, to run the ``print-function-names`` plugin over a source file in
clang, first build the plugin, and then call clang with the plugin from the
source tree:

.. code-block:: console

  $ export BD=/path/to/build/directory
  $ (cd $BD && make PrintFunctionNames )
  $ clang++ -D_GNU_SOURCE -D_DEBUG -D__STDC_CONSTANT_MACROS \
            -D__STDC_FORMAT_MACROS -D__STDC_LIMIT_MACROS -D_GNU_SOURCE \
            -I$BD/tools/clang/include -Itools/clang/include -I$BD/include -Iinclude \
            tools/clang/tools/clang-check/ClangCheck.cpp -fsyntax-only \
            -Xclang -load -Xclang $BD/lib/PrintFunctionNames.so -Xclang \
            -plugin -Xclang print-fns

Also see the print-function-name plugin example's
`README <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/clang/examples/PrintFunctionNames/README.txt>`_


Using the clang command line
----------------------------

Using `-fplugin=plugin` on the clang command line passes the plugin
through as an argument to `-load` on the cc1 command line. If the plugin
class implements the ``getActionType`` method then the plugin is run
automatically. For example, to run the plugin automatically after the main AST
action (i.e. the same as using `-add-plugin`):

.. code-block:: c++

  // Automatically run the plugin after the main AST action
  PluginASTAction::ActionType getActionType() override {
    return AddAfterMainAction;
  }

Commit message:

[clang][driver] Add -fplugin-arg- to pass arguments to plugins
From GCC's manpage:
-fplugin-arg-name-key=value
   Define an argument called key with a value of value for the
   plugin called name.

Since we don't have a key-value pair similar to gcc's plugin_argument
struct, simply accept key=value here anyway and pass it along as-is to
plugins.

This translates to the already existing '-plugin-arg-pluginname arg'
that clang cc1 accepts.

There is an ambiguity here because in clang, both the plugin name
as well as the option name can contain dashes, so when e.g. passing

 -fplugin-arg-foo-bar-foo

it is not clear whether the plugin is foo-bar and the option is foo,
or the plugin is foo and the option is bar-foo. GCC solves this by
interpreting all dashes as part of the option name. So dashes can't be
part of the plugin name in this case.

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D113250

clang/docs/ClangPlugins.rst, after:

=============
Clang Plugins
=============

Clang Plugins make it possible to run extra user defined actions during a
compilation. This document will provide a basic walkthrough of how to write and
run a Clang Plugin.

Introduction
============

Clang Plugins run FrontendActions over code. See the :doc:`FrontendAction
tutorial <RAVFrontendAction>` on how to write a ``FrontendAction`` using the
``RecursiveASTVisitor``. In this tutorial, we'll demonstrate how to write a
simple clang plugin.

Writing a ``PluginASTAction``
=============================

The main difference from writing normal ``FrontendActions`` is that you can
handle plugin command line options. The ``PluginASTAction`` base class declares
a ``ParseArgs`` method which you have to implement in your plugin.

.. code-block:: c++

  bool ParseArgs(const CompilerInstance &CI,
                 const std::vector<std::string>& args) {
    for (unsigned i = 0, e = args.size(); i != e; ++i) {
      if (args[i] == "-some-arg") {
        // Handle the command line argument.
      }
    }
    return true;
  }

Registering a plugin
====================

A plugin is loaded from a dynamic library at runtime by the compiler. To
register a plugin in a library, use ``FrontendPluginRegistry::Add<>``:

.. code-block:: c++

  static FrontendPluginRegistry::Add<MyPlugin> X("my-plugin-name", "my plugin description");

Defining pragmas
================

Plugins can also define pragmas by declaring a ``PragmaHandler`` and
registering it using ``PragmaHandlerRegistry::Add<>``:

.. code-block:: c++

  // Define a pragma handler for #pragma example_pragma
  class ExamplePragmaHandler : public PragmaHandler {
  public:
    ExamplePragmaHandler() : PragmaHandler("example_pragma") { }
    void HandlePragma(Preprocessor &PP, PragmaIntroducer Introducer,
                      Token &PragmaTok) {
      // Handle the pragma
    }
  };

  static PragmaHandlerRegistry::Add<ExamplePragmaHandler> Y("example_pragma","example pragma description");

Defining attributes
===================

Plugins can define attributes by declaring a ``ParsedAttrInfo`` and registering
it using ``ParsedAttrInfoRegister::Add<>``:

.. code-block:: c++

  class ExampleAttrInfo : public ParsedAttrInfo {
  public:
    ExampleAttrInfo() {
      Spellings.push_back({ParsedAttr::AS_GNU,"example"});
    }
    AttrHandling handleDeclAttribute(Sema &S, Decl *D,
                                     const ParsedAttr &Attr) const override {
      // Handle the attribute
      return AttributeApplied;
    }
  };

  static ParsedAttrInfoRegistry::Add<ExampleAttrInfo> Z("example_attr","example attribute description");

The members of ``ParsedAttrInfo`` that a plugin attribute must define are:

 * ``Spellings``, which must be populated with every `Spelling
   </doxygen/structclang_1_1ParsedAttrInfo_1_1Spelling.html>`_ of the
   attribute, each of which consists of an attribute syntax and how the
   attribute name is spelled for that syntax. If the syntax allows a scope then
   the spelling must be "scope::attr" if a scope is present or "::attr" if not.
 * ``handleDeclAttribute``, which is the function that applies the attribute to
   a declaration. It is responsible for checking that the attribute's arguments
   are valid, and typically applies the attribute by adding an ``Attr`` to the
   ``Decl``. It returns either ``AttributeApplied``, to indicate that the
   attribute was successfully applied, or ``AttributeNotApplied`` if it wasn't.

The members of ``ParsedAttrInfo`` that may need to be defined, depending on the
attribute, are:

 * ``NumArgs`` and ``OptArgs``, which set the number of required and optional
   arguments to the attribute.
 * ``diagAppertainsToDecl``, which checks if the attribute has been used on the
   right kind of declaration and issues a diagnostic if not.
 * ``diagLangOpts``, which checks if the attribute is permitted for the current
   language mode and issues a diagnostic if not.
 * ``existsInTarget``, which checks if the attribute is permitted for the given
   target.

To see a working example of an attribute plugin, see `the Attribute.cpp example
<https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/clang/examples/Attribute/Attribute.cpp>`_.

Putting it all together
=======================

Let's look at an example plugin that prints top-level function names.  This
example is checked into the clang repository; please take a look at
the `latest version of PrintFunctionNames.cpp
<https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/clang/examples/PrintFunctionNames/PrintFunctionNames.cpp>`_.

Running the plugin
==================


Using the compiler driver
--------------------------

The Clang driver accepts the `-fplugin` option to load a plugin.
Clang plugins can receive arguments from the compiler driver command
line via the `fplugin-arg-<plugin name>-<argument>` option. Using this
method, the plugin name cannot contain dashes itself, but the argument
passed to the plugin can.


.. code-block:: console

  $ export BD=/path/to/build/directory
  $ make -C $BD CallSuperAttr
  $ clang++ -fplugin=$BD/lib/CallSuperAttr.so \
            -fplugin-arg-call_super_plugin-help \
            test.cpp

If your plugin name contains dashes, either rename the plugin or used the
cc1 command line options listed below.


Using the cc1 command line
--------------------------

To run a plugin, the dynamic library containing the plugin registry must be
loaded via the `-load` command line option. This will load all plugins
that are registered, and you can select the plugins to run by specifying the
`-plugin` option. Additional parameters for the plugins can be passed with
`-plugin-arg-<plugin-name>`.

Note that those options must reach clang's cc1 process. There are two
ways to do so:

* Directly call the parsing process by using the `-cc1` option; this
  has the downside of not configuring the default header search paths, so
  you'll need to specify the full system path configuration on the command
  line.
* Use clang as usual, but prefix all arguments to the cc1 process with
  `-Xclang`.

For example, to run the ``print-function-names`` plugin over a source file in
clang, first build the plugin, and then call clang with the plugin from the
source tree:

.. code-block:: console

  $ export BD=/path/to/build/directory
  $ (cd $BD && make PrintFunctionNames )
  $ clang++ -D_GNU_SOURCE -D_DEBUG -D__STDC_CONSTANT_MACROS \
            -D__STDC_FORMAT_MACROS -D__STDC_LIMIT_MACROS -D_GNU_SOURCE \
            -I$BD/tools/clang/include -Itools/clang/include -I$BD/include -Iinclude \
            tools/clang/tools/clang-check/ClangCheck.cpp -fsyntax-only \
            -Xclang -load -Xclang $BD/lib/PrintFunctionNames.so -Xclang \
            -plugin -Xclang print-fns

Also see the print-function-name plugin example's
`README <https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/clang/examples/PrintFunctionNames/README.txt>`_


Using the clang command line
----------------------------

Using `-fplugin=plugin` on the clang command line passes the plugin
through as an argument to `-load` on the cc1 command line. If the plugin
class implements the ``getActionType`` method then the plugin is run
automatically. For example, to run the plugin automatically after the main AST
action (i.e. the same as using `-add-plugin`):

.. code-block:: c++

  // Automatically run the plugin after the main AST action
  PluginASTAction::ActionType getActionType() override {
    return AddAfterMainAction;
  }
