<!--
Part of the Carbon Language, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.
See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

# Carbon: Lexical conventions

- **Authors:** Richard Smith
- **[Tracking issue](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/16)**
- **Status:** RFC
- **Created:** 2020-05-18

**_PLEASE_ DO NOT SHARE OUTSIDE CARBON FORUMS**

## Problem

This document proposes a set of rules for the initial phase of processing a
Carbon source file: interpreting the contents of the file and forming
[tokens](#tokens).

## Proposal

Carbon source files are [UTF-8](#file-contents-and-encoding) text files whose
contents are divided into *lexical elements*: [whitespace](#whitespace),
[comments](#comments), [literals](#literals), [words](#words)
(including [identifiers](#identifiers) and [keywords](#keywords)),
[designators](#designators), [operators](#operators), and
[brackets](#brackets), as described in the [lexing](#lexing) section below.

Lexical elements are formed by a single left-to-right scan of the source file,
using a "max munch" rule: the longest possible next lexical element is formed
at each step.

After division into these components, whitespace and text and block comments
are discarded, and words are classified as either identifiers or keywords; the
remaining lexical elements are [tokens](#tokens), and the result is the
*tokenized* form of the source file, which is the input to the parsing step.

## Lexing

### File contents and encoding

Carbon source files are Unicode text files encoded in UTF-8. An initial UTF-8
BOM is permitted and ignored.
[[why?]](#encoding-rationale)

For implementation simplicitly, all contents outside of [comments](#comments)
and [literals](#literals) shall be in Normalization Form C. The Carbon formatter
tool will convert source text to NFC as necessary to satisfy this constraint.
[[why?]](#formatting-rationale)

Carbon is currently based on Unicode 13.0, and will adopt new Unicode versions
as they are published.

**Open question:** Should we require source text to be in NFC, as C++ plans to
do (and GCC currently enforces with a warning), or should we normalize non-NFC
identifiers ourselves?

### Whitespace

Characters are identified as whitespace if and only if they have the Unicode
`Pattern_White_Space` property. These include the ASCII whitespace characters (recognized in C++):

 * Space and horizontal tab
 * Carriage return and line feed (which C++ conflates as "new line")
 * Vertical tab and form feed

As of Unicode version 13, 5 additional characters are included:

 * U+0085 NEXT LINE
 * U+200E LEFT-TO-RIGHT MARK
 * U+200F RIGHT-TO-LEFT MARK
 * U+2028 LINE SEPARATOR
 * U+2029 PARAGRAPH SEPARATOR

Space, horizontal tab, and the LTR and RTL marks (see
[directionality](#directionality)) are *horizontal whitespace* characters. All
other whitespace characters are *vertical whitespace* characters.

Characters with the Unicode property `White_Space` but not
`Pattern_White_Space` are invalid outside comments and literals. Code
formatters are encouraged to convert them into recognized horizontal whitespace
characters. Implementations are encouraged to recover from the error as if
those characters were treated as horizontal whitespace.

A *line* is a possibly-empty sequence of characters preceded and followed by
either vertical whitespace or the beginning or end of the file. As a special
case, an empty sequence of characters preceded by a carriage return and
followed by a line feed is not treated as a line. For example, "foo\r\nbar"
contains two lines, and "foo\n\rbar" contains three, of which the middle line
is empty.

The *indentation* of a line is the sequence of horizontal whitespace characters
at the start of the line. A line *A* has more indentation than a line *B* if the
indentation of *B* is a proper prefix of the indentation of *A*. (Note that
neither of "\t\t" and "\t " is considered more indented than the other.)

**Open question:** Should we be more opinionated on whitespace? We could
potentially disallow everything other than space and newline (and, depending
on what we decide for [directionality](#directionality), perhaps LTR marks),
which would lead to a substantially simpler indentation rule.

### Comments

A *comment* begins with the characters `//` and runs to the end of the line.
Carbon has no mechanism for physical line continuation, so a trailing `\` does
not extend a comment to subsequent lines. There shall be no text other than
horizontal whitespace before the `//` characters introducing a comment. (Either
all of a line is a comment, or none of it.)
[[why?]](#line-continuation-rationale)

The *kind* of a comment is determined by the character(s) after the `//`
characters as follows:

 * whitespace: the comment is a [text comment](#text-comments)
 * `/` or `!` followed by whitespace: the comment is a [documentation
   comment](#documentation-comments)
 * `\{` or `\}`: the comment is an opening or closing [block
   comment](#block-comments) delimiter, respectively
 * anything else: the input is invalid

For the purpose of the above rule, the end of the file is considered to be
whitespace. The `//` characters followed by the above additional characters
form the *comment introducer*.

#### Text comments

A *text comment* is a comment introduced by `//` followed by whitespace. Text
comments do not result in tokens.

Example:

```carbon
// This is a comment and is ignored. \
This is not a comment.

var Int: x; // error, trailing comments not allowed
```

#### Documentation comments

A *documentation comment* is a comment introduced by `//` followed by either an
exclamation mark or another `/`, in either case followed by whitespace.
Documentation comments are tokens, and are recognized by the language grammar
only in specific locations, which determine the entity to which they attach.
[[why?]](#documentation-comments-rationale)

Example:

```carbon
//! This is a documentation comment.
/// So is this.
fn DocumentedFunction() {}

var Int
  //! This is an error; a documentation comment cannot appear here.
  : x;
```

**Open question:** Should we accept only one or the other kind of documentation
comment?

 - In favor of `///`: it is easier to type, and likely to be more comfortable to
   read, especially for larger comment blocks.
 - In favor of `//!`: it is less likely to be confused with `//`; writing `//`
   where `///` is intended is a common error in C++ code using Doxygen.

#### Block comments

An *opening block comment line* is a line starting with `//\{`, with no
indentation. A *closing block comment line* is a line starting with `//\}`,
with no indentation. A comment starting with `//\{` or `//\}` shall form an
opening or closing block comment line. Opening and closing block comment lines
can only appear as part of block comments. (In particular, these lines cannot
appear within block string literals.)

A *block comment* is a comment that starts with an opening block comment line and
ends with a closing block comment line. Block comments nest: every line for
which the total number of preceding opening block comment lines is greater than
the total number of preceding closign block comment lines is part of a block
comment.
[[why?]](#block-comments-rationale)
[[alternatives]](#block-comment-alternatives)

If any characters appear between the closing `//\}` and the end of its line,
that sequence of characters shall be the same as the characters between the
opening `//\{` and the end of its line.

Example:

```carbon
//\{ temp
fn CommentedOutFunction() {
  // It's OK to include a //\} in the middle of this comment; it's not a
  // comment introducer so doesn't end the block comment.

  //\} is not a closing block comment line, so doesn't end the comment.

//\{
    Nested comment.
//\}

  var String: closing_comment_marker = r"""
  //\}
  """;
}
//\}

//\{ mismatched

// This is an error due to mismatched closing text.
//\} temp

// The next line is an error because the //\{ is not at the start of the line.
  //\{
```

#### Reserved comments

Comment introducers that do not have one of the above forms are invalid.
[[why?]](#comment-introducers-rationale)

### Literals

Carbon provides literal syntax for numbers, and for character and string data.
(Additional constants, such as `True` and `Nullptr`, are exposed as keywords or
predeclared identifiers.)

A *literal* is a numeric literal, a character literal, or a string literal, as
defined below.

A literal shall not be immediately followed a [word continuation
character](#words). Carbon has no literal suffixes, but the corresponding
lexical space is reserved for future extensions.

#### Numbers

Decimal integers are written as a non-zero decimal digit followed by zero or
more additional decimal digits, or as a single `0`.

Integers in other bases are written as a `0` followed by a base specifier
character, followed by a sequence of digits in the corresponding base. The
available base specifiers and corresponding bases are:

| Base specifier | Base | Digits                   |
| -------------- | ---- | ------------------------ |
| `b`            | 2    | `0` and `1`              |
| `o`            | 8    | `0` ... `7`              |
| `x`            | 16   | `0` ... `9`, `A` ... `F` |

Note that the above table is case-sensitive. `0O123` is invalid, as is `0Xa`.
[[why?]](#integers-rationale)

Real numbers are written as a sequence of one or more decimal digits followed
by a decimal point followed by a sequence of one or more decimal digits.
[[why?]](#real-numbers-rationale)

A real number can be followed by an `e`, an optional `+` or `-` (defaulting to
`+`), and a character sequence matching the grammar of a decimal integer with
some value *N*; the effect is to multiply the given value by
10<sup>&plusmn;*N*</sup>.

A *numeric literal* is an integer or real number expressed as described above.

**Open question:** Should we allow digit separators? With what lexical syntax?
Should we require them to be evenly spaced? Spaced "naturally" (groups of 3 for
decimal, some power of 2 for octal and binary)?

#### Strings

A *simple string literal* is formed of a sequence of

 * characters other than backslashes, double quotation marks, and vertical
   whitespace
 * escape sequences

enclosed in double quotation marks (`"`). Each escape sequence is replaced with
the corresponding character sequence or encoding.

TODO: Add a table of escape sequences. `\{` and `\}` are invalid, in order to
avoid ambiguities between (non-raw) block string literals and block comments.

A *raw string literal* starts with an `r` followed by *N* `#` characters
followed by a double quotation mark, and ends with the first following
occurrence of a double quotation mark followed by *N* `#` characters on the
same line. The text in between is not interpreted in any way.

A *block string literal* starts with three double quotation marks, followed by
an optional file type indicator, followed by a newline, and ends at the next
instance of three double quotation marks. The closing `"""` shall be the first
non-whitespace characters on that line. The lines between the opening line and
the new line are *content lines*. Each non-empty content line shall be [at
least as indented](#whitespace) as the line containing the closing `"""`. The
closing line shall be at least as indented as the opening line, and shall be
more indented if the opening `"""` are not the first non-whitespace characters
on the opening line. The content of the literal is formed by removing the
indentation of the closing line from each (non-empty) content line, and
concatenating the results with a line feed character added between each pair of
lines.
[[why?]](#block-strings-rationale)
[[alternatives]](#string-alternatives)

A *file type indicator* is a sequence of characters that are either [word
continuation characters](#words) or [operator characters](#operators).

A *raw block string literal* is expressed analogously to a raw string literal,
but for a block string literal. Escape sequences are ignored, but indentation
is removed and each vertical whitespace character is replaced by a line feed
as in a non-raw block string literal.

For example:

```carbon
fn f() {
  var String: w = """
  This is a string literal. Its first character is 'T' and its last character
  is '.'. It contains one embedded newline, between 'character' and 'is'.
  """;
  var String: x = r#"""
    This is the content of the string. The 'T' is the first character
    of the string.
    """ <-- This is not the end of the string.
    """#; // <-- But this is.
  var String: y = r"Hello\"; // OK, final character is \
  var String: z = r##"Raw strings r#"nesting"#"##;

  // The contents of this string start and end with exactly two "s.
  var String: ambig1 = r#"""This is a raw string literal starting with """#;
  // This string is a block raw string literal with file-type 'This',
  // whose contents start with "is a ".
  var String: ambig2 = r#"""This
    is a block string literal with file type 'This' and first character 'i'.
    """#;

  // This is a block string literal. Its first two characters are spaces, and its last character is '.' It has a file type of 'c++'.
  var String: starts_with_whitespace = """c++
      int x = 1; // This line starts with two spaces.
      int y = 2; // This line starts with two spaces.
    """;

  var String: invalid1 = """
error: insufficiently indented.
""";
  var String: invalid2 = r#"""
    error: closing """ is not on its own line."""#;
}
```

A raw block string literal is required to have non-empty indentation to avoid
ambiguity with block comments.
[[why?]](#block-comments-rationale)

**Open question:** Should we only require raw string literals containing an
opening or closing block comment line to be indented? (An equivalent but
perhaps simpler formulation of the alternative rule: opening and closing block
comment lines are disallowed in block string.)

#### Characters

A *character literal* is lexically identical to a simple string literal, except
that it is enclosed in single quotation marks (`'`) instead of double quotation
marks (`"`).

**Open question:** Do we need both character literals and string literals?
Unicode character literals in general require more than one code unit to
represent, so are somewhat more string-like than character-like.

### Words

A *word* is a maximal sequence of characters beginning with a character
with Unicode property `XID_Start`, followed by zero or more *word continuation
characters*, which are characters that either have property `XID_Continue` or
are underscores (`_`). A [raw identifier](#raw-identifiers), described below,
is also lexically a word.

Notably, `XID_Start` does not include the underscore character. Tokens
beginning with an underscore are [reserved](#reserved-tokens).
[[why?]](#underscores-rationale)

A word is interpreted as either a keyword or an identifier. If a word is ever
declared within a source file, then it is interpreted as an identifier
throughout that source file; otherwise, it is interpreted as a keyword
throughout that source file.
[[why?]](#keywords-rationale)

Example:

```carbon
var Int: fn = 3; // OK, variable named 'fn'
fn f() {}        // error, 'fn' is not a keyword in this source file
interface var {} // error, already used 'var' as a keyword in this source file
```

A word shall not be immediately followed by a `"` or `'`.

#### Identifiers

Identifier tokens can appear in two different contexts: they either declare the
identifier, binding it to an entity, or they reference an entity that has
already been declared. Carbon's grammatical rules will make it straightforward
to locally distinguish between these two cases.

All identifier tokens in all contexts that are referencing a prior declaration
are looked up using the same lexical scoping rule.

#### Raw identifiers

A *raw identifier* can be specified by prefixing a word with `r#`, such as
`r#requires`. Raw identifiers can be used to introduce and use names that are
lexically identical to keywords. The declaration of a raw identifier does not
prevent the base word from being interpreted as a keyword; otherwise, they
behave identically to the word formed by removing the `r#` prefix.
[[why?]](#keywords-rationale)

#### Keywords

A *keyword* is a word with predefined meaning. Carbon has a predefined set of
keywords, that will be specified separately as part of the syntax rules, and
that is expected to grow over time.

We intend to restrict keywords to the characters `a` ... `z` and `_`.

### Designators

A *designator* is a token formed by prefixing a word with a period character,
such as `.member`. The identifier after the period is the *member name*, and is
looked up in a context-dependent manner.
[[why?]](#designators-rationale)

### Operators

An *operator* is a maximal sequence of characters with Unicode property
`Pattern_Syntax`, excluding `"` and `'` and those characters with class `Ps` or
`Pe` (for which, see [brackets](#brackets)), which we will refer to as
*operator characters*.
[[why?]](#operators-rationale)
[[alternatives]](#operators-alternatives)

We do not intend to define any operators containing non-ASCII characters. The
ASCII operator characters are:

```
!  #  $  %  &  *  +  -  .  /  :  ;  <  =  >  ?  @  \  ^  `  |  ~
```

Of these, we intend to not use <code>\`</code> due to its common use to escape
code, nor `$` due to its absence from many non-US keyboards. This leaves 20
operator characters, 400 digraphs, and so on.

Bracket operators, described below, are also operators.

**Open question:** Instead of the "max munch" rule described here, should we
only lex operators that actually exist? For example, this would mean that `**p`
is lexed as three tokens (`*`, `*`, `p`) rather than two (nonexistent `**`,
`p`).

### Brackets

A *simple open bracket* is a character with Unicode property `Pattern_Syntax`
and character class `Ps`. We intend to restrict Carbon syntax to ASCII, leaving three such characters: `(`, `[`, and `{`.  
A *simple close bracket* is a character
with Unicode property `Pattern_Syntax` and character class `Pe`. There are
three such characters in ASCII: `)`, `]`, and `}`.  
A *bracket terminator character* is one of `|` or `:`.  
A *bracket continuation character* is an operator character that is not a
bracket terminator character. Restricted to ASCII, that is one of:
```
!  #  %  &  *  +  -  .  /  ;  <  =  >  ?  @  \  ^  ~
```

A *compound open bracket* is a simple open bracket followed by zero or more
bracket continuation characters followed by a bracket terminator character,
such as `[:`.  
A *compound close bracket* is a bracket terminator character followed by zero
or more bracket continuation characters followed by a simple close bracket,
such as `|=)`.  
[[why?]](#compound-brackets-rationale)

An *open bracket* is either a simple open bracket or a compound open bracket.
A *close bracket* is either a simple close bracket or a compound close bracket.

The close bracket matching an open bracket is formed by reversing the character
sequence in the open bracket and replacing each character with class `Ps` with
the corresponding character with class `Pe`. Every open bracket is required to
have a matching close bracket such that the bracketed regions form a tree
structure.

Because we do not intend to include any non-ASCII characters as part of Carbon's
syntax, there are 3 single-character brackets (`()`, `{}`, `[]`), 6 bracket
digraphs (`(| |)`, `{| |}`, `[| |]`, `(: :)`, `{: :}`, `[: :]`), 108 bracket
trigraphs, and so on.

For example:

```carbon
(this is within brackets {and this [this too]})
(|this is a different kind of bracket {: and another :}
   (**|lots of kinds of brackets can be built [=: this way :=]|**)
 |)
```

Each non-empty line from the line containing an opening bracket to the line
containing the matching closing bracket (inclusive) shall have at least as much
indentation as the line containing the opening bracket.
[[why?]](#bracket-indentation-rationale)

In addition, Carbon recognizes *bracket operators*, formed by a simple open
bracket followed by one or more operator characters followed by a matching
simple close bracket, such as `[~>]` or `(*)`. Bracket operators are operators,
not brackets.

### Reserved lexical elements

It is an error if an attempt is made to form a lexical element in the following
circumstances:

 * When the first character does not have property `XID_Continue` or
   `Pattern_Syntax`.
 * As a special case of the prior bullet, when the first character is an
   underscore. [[why?]](#underscores-rationale)
 * When the first two characters are `r#` and neither a raw identifier nor a
   raw string literal would be formed.

### Tokens

A *token* is a documentation comment, a literal, a keyword, an identifier, a
designator, an operator, or a bracket.

### Directionality

After tokens are formed, a final check is performed to ensure that the
appearance of the code matches its meaning, as follows. The Unicode
Bidirectional Algorithm, as described in Unicode 13.0.0
[UAX#9](https://unicode.org/reports/tr9/), is applied to the source text. It is
an error if any part of a token would be displayed after any part of a later
token, or if any operator or bracket or the delimiters of a string literal or
comment does not have a resolved directionality of L (left-to-right).

Such issues can be resolved by the insertion of explicit left-to-right marks.
The Carbon formatter tool will insert such marks as necessary to satisfy these
constraints.
[[why?]](#formatting-rationale)

## Rationale

### Encoding rationale

We intend for words in Carbon to follow the Unicode Consortium's
recommentations for identifiers in programming languages as described in
Unicode 13.0.0 [UAX#31](https://unicode.org/reports/tr31/) Revision 33. We do
not see a reason to be inventive in this regard, and delegating the complex
considerations over how Unicode characters should be used to a group with
greater expertise in that area seems appropriate.

As an exception, Carbon permits underscore as a continuation character in
words. Usage of this character is sufficiently common in C++ identifiers that
excluding it conflicts with our interoperability goal. However, leading
underscores are not permitted in Carbon words.
[[why?]](#underscores-rationale)

We observe UAX#31's requirements as follows:

 * UAX31-R1: requirement met. Identifiers are of the form `XID_Start`
   `Continue`\*, using a profile in which `Continue` is `XID_Continue` plus
   U+005F LOW LINE (`_`).
 * UAX31-R1a: requirement not met. Format characters are not permitted in
   identifiers.
 * UAX31-R1b: requirement not met. We intend for Carbon evolution to follow
   Unicode evolution, including removing identifier characters as appropriate
   over time.
 * UAX31-R2: requirement not met. We intend for Carbon evolution to follow
   Unicode evolution, including adding identifier characters as appropriate
   over time.
 * UAX31-R3: requirement met. Carbon treats characters as whitespace if and
   only if they are `Pattern_White_Space` characters, and all operator tokens
   are formed exclusively from `Pattern_Syntax` characters.
 * UAX31-R4: requirement met. Carbon identifiers are required to be in NFC,
   so identifiers that are the same in NFC are equivalent.
 * UAX31-R5: requirement not met. Carbon identifiers are case-sensitive, so
   this requirement is inapplicable.
 * UAX31-R6: requirement met. No characters are excluded from normalization.
 * UAX31-R7: requirement not met. Carbon identifiers are case-sensitive, so
   this requirement is inapplicable.
 * UAX31-R8: requirement not applicable. Carbon does not have hashtag
   identifiers.

### Formatting rationale

We expect Carbon to ship with a code auto-formatter that is used routinely as
part of all Carbon code development. There is a very low burden on the
programmer from requiring that source code be in compliance with formatting
decisions made by the formatter: at worst, we'd expect them to see a diagnostic
instructing them to run `carbon-format`, but in most cases this should happen
before the code gets to the compiler (perhaps as an on-save hook in their
editor, and/or bound to a keyboard shortcut used while editing code).

We can realize useful benefits by relying on code being properly-formatted, if
"formatting" is interpreted suitably generally. For example, we can ensure that
the code's appearance matches its meaning in many cases (avoiding both
deliberate and accidental problems) by ensuring that Unicode left-to-right marks
are used where necessary, that identifiers are properly normalized, and so on,
and we can simplify our implementation somewhat by only permitting input in a
single Unicode normalization form.

### Line continuation rationale

Line continuation in C++ is sometimes necessary in order to combine the needs
of line-oriented parsing with the desire to meet a specific column limit or
format code nicely. For example:

```c++
#define SOME_MACRO \
  very long macro body \
  split over multiple lines
#define OTHER_MACRO \
  if (pretty_code) \
    do { wrap_lines() } while (false)
```

We do not have a commensurate need for line continuation in Carbon. We intend
to include no line-oriented syntax. In reasonable cases where an individual
token is longer than a natural column limit (such as for a long string
literal), we will provide a mechanism to wrap the token without line
continuation.

Line continuation for comments in particular is a known source of gotchas in C
and C++ programs.

### Documentation comments rationale

Carbon code is expected to include documentation comments. Specifying such
comments as part of the language definition allows a consistent interpretation
of the comments, and a consistent attachment of the comments to entities, to be
provided for Carbon programs.

### Comment introducers rationale

We anticipate the possibility of adding additional kinds of comment in the
future. Reserving syntactic space in comment syntax, in a way that is easy for
programs to avoid, allows us to add such additional kinds of comment as a
non-breaking change.

### Block comments rationale

It is important to be able to comment out a block of Carbon code confident in the
knowledge that all text between the comment markers (and exactly that text) was
in fact commented out. This leads to the following requirements:

 * Block comments must nest.
 * Closing comment markers in string literals and in any kind of nested
   comment do not close the outer comment.
 * Opening comment markers in string literals and in line comments do not
   introduce an additional unintended level of commenting.

In addition, block comment syntax should not require lexing the contents of the
comment. Therefore we need to disallow the block comment closing syntax from
appearing in other tokens (in particular, in block string literals). There are
at least two reasonable ways to do this:

 * Require block comment opening and closing lines to be unindented and require
   string literals to be indented.
 * Pick a syntax for block comment opening and closing lines that cannot appear
   in string literals.

Our chosen approach combines these alternatives: the `\{` and `\}` in a block
comment are both invalid in non-raw string literals (they can be expressed as
`\\{` or `\\}` if desired). However, we cannot disallow these comment markers
in raw string literals without harming their ability to represent arbitrary
text. Therefore we require all raw string literals to be indented at least one
space.

### Integers rationale

Carbon requires a base specifier for octal numbers. A common error in C
and C++ code is using a leading 0 to align numbers horizontally:

```
int vals[] = {
  1234,
  0567,
  8912
};
```

But this leads to the `0567` being interpreted as an octal number. We
could treat numbers with a leading `0` as decimal always, but this also
risks confusing programmers who are familiar with the C and C++ rules.
Therefore we require a base specifier for octal, reject any number that
starts with a leading `0` but no base specifier (other than `0` itself)
to keep the rule simple.

The base specifier (if present) is required to be written in lowercase.
For binary, this avoids a visual confusion between `08` and `0B`. For
octal, it avoids a visual confusion between `0O` and `00`. And in
general, being opinionated here has very little cost and removes a
possible style argument. We require the hexadecimal digits in an
`0x`-prefixed number to be written in uppercase to keep them visually
distinct from the prefix, in the case where `A` ... `F` would follow
the prefix (it is easier to visually separate the digits from the base
specifier in `0xAB23` than in `0xab23`).

### Real numbers rationale

Real numbers in Carbon always require a decimal point, and require at
least one digit on each side of the decimal point.

In C and C++, the decimal point may be omitted in a number with an
exponent, such as `1e6`, but a common source of errors is imagining
that this syntax produces an integer literal rather than a
floating-point literal.

Requiring a digit on both sides of the decimal point improves
readability and avoids style arguments. In addition, disallowing a
literal from beginning with a period followed by a digit frees up `.0`
for future use as a designator for tuple indexing, and similarly
`4.ToString()` unambiguously lexes as an integer followed by a
designator followed by two parentheses.

This rationale assumes that we will permit the initialization of a
floating-point variable with an integer literal. If we choose to
disallow that, concerns have been raised that permitting `1.` instead
of `1.0` may be desirabe for ergonomic reasons.

See also the section on [floating-point
literals](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Floating_Literals)
in the Google style guide, which argues for the same rule.

As with base specifiers for integers, the `e` introducing an exponent
is required to be lowercase to improve readability.

### Block strings rationale

Block literals are a useful way of expressing multiline string content in a
program. It's useful to treat block literals and raw literals as distinct
concepts: even within multiline literals, explicit encoding of tab characters,
character escapes, and so forth can be useful or undesirable. For example:

```carbon
var String: raw_code = r"""carbon
  var String: example = "hello\n\tworld"; // Contains two backslashes.
  """;
var String: expanded_code = """carbon
  \tvar Int: n = 123; // Starts with tab and ends with newline.\n
  """;
```

Further, separating the concepts permits us to disallow newlines in non-block
raw string literals, which prevents one class of runaway lexing problem: the
inability to find the end of a raw string literal can lead to scanning and
consuming the entirety of the source file. It is better to ask the user to
explicitly express their intent than to assume that we're in the rare case
where a missing closing double-quote indicates a multi-line string.

Removing the initial indentation from block string literals serves two primary
purposes: it allows the lexer to intelligently abort and backtrack sooner if it
reaches the end of the indented region without seeing the end of string marker
(essentially enabling detection of runaway block string literals), and it
improves the readability of the code.

### Underscores rationale

Tokens beginning with an underscore are currently reserved, but are expected to
be used to represent wildcards in pattern matching. The precise rules are not
yet determined, so we are not committing to any lexical conventions for such
tokens yet.

We could permit such tokens as identifiers for now, and claim them back as
keywords later if needed. There are some reasons not to follow that approach:

 * The semantic interpretation of such tokens may be quite different from that
   of regular identifiers: they may not be subject to regular name lookup and
   not required to be declared before being used, but also not part of a
   predefined finite set of keywords with unique meaning.
 * We may want to use different lexical rules for underscores, such as treating
   `_` as a standalone token (even when followed by an identifier) or as an
   operator character. The evolutionary path for such a change would be
   challenging.

Underscores are common in C++ identifiers, which motivates permitting them in
Carbon to support our C++ interoperability goal. However, leading underscores
are rare in publicly-visible C++ identifiers, and result in reserved
identifiers in many contexts, so we do not have similar motivation to permit
those.

Leading underscores are used in some C++ code to distinguish member names from
non-member names. In Carbon, we anticipate all identifiers being declared
locally and found by a simple lexical lookup rule, so use of leading
underscores to avoid name collisions should generally be unnecessary. As such,
we lack a strong motivation to permit such identifiers.

### Keywords rationale

One of Carbon's most important goals is to support program and language
evolution. We know that the set of keywords in Carbon will grow over time,
and the easiest kind of language change from an evolutionary perspective is one
that is known to break no programs, that lets programs migrate incrementally to
the new language rule, and that either has no migration cost or only imposes
automatable migration cost on the code that intends to use the new feature.

The proposed approach to keywords intends to support such a migration story.
Adding new keywords to Carbon is a non-breaking change. Because every
identifier is locally declared using obvious syntax before it is used, it is
straightforward to detect, using simple rules, whether a particular word is a
keyword or not in a particular source file.

Using a new keyword in an existing source file requires first replacing all
existing uses of that word with raw identifiers throughout the source file,
which is a mechanical, automatable change.

For identifiers whose scopes are constrained to a single source file, raw
identifiers are not necessary to permit such a transition. However, for
identifiers that are declared in one source file and redeclared in another, we
still need a mechanism to continue declaring a name as an identifier after it
has been claimed as a keyword. (Use of an identifier from a different source
file, or at the very least from a different package, is expected to typically
require use of a designator rather than a word.)

Note that while this means that adding a new keyword is cheap in terms of
migration cost, we should still think of adding a keyword as being a
significant undertaking, as each keyword will occupy space in the mind of the
Carbon programmer. However, we should not feel any pressure to reuse the same
keyword for distinct purposes.

This approach brings one important restriction: in any syntax that declares
an identifier, it should always be straightforward to determine the identifier
that is being introduced, even if it lexically identical to a keyword. In
particular, there should never be an optional keyword preceding the identifier,
and nor should the identifier be optional if it can be followed by a keyword.

It should be noted that this approach also introduces a novel risk of
underhanded code that appears to mean one thing but means a different thing, by
shadowing a keyword with an identifier. This risk is discussed in [Initial
Analysis of Underhanded Source Code (Wheeler
2020)](https://www.ida.org/-/media/feature/publications/i/in/initial-analysis-of-underhanded-source-code/d-13166.ashx)
(page 4-2).

### Designators rationale

We wish to have uniform scoping and name lookup rules throughout Carbon.
However, we also wish to parse expressions such as `x.y`, where `x` is looked
up as an identifier, and `y` has some other lookup rule. We also wish to use
`.y` as a designator when initializing fields.

It is reasonable to conclude that an identifier preceded by a period is a
fundamentally different kind of token from a regular identifier: it has
different name lookup rules (if it's looked up at all) and cannot simply be
immediately resolved by lookup in the environment.

Treating such tokens as special at the lexical level has other beneficial effects:

 * It avoids a special case in the rules for binary operators. This would be
   the only binary operator that affects how name lookup is performed on its
   right-hand side, and would be the only binary operator for which we do not
   expect (or perhaps require) whitespace on both sides.
 * It prohibits whitespace between the period and the identifier. This enforces
   an intended stylistic convention. As a postfix unary operator, we will also
   enforce an absence of whitespace before designators in member access syntax.
 * It allows extremely fast lexical name lookup for all identifiers via string
   interning: the same lookup that checks whether an identifier is a keyword
   can also perform the complete lexical lookup if it's not an identifier.
 * It permits uniform typo correction, including correction to keywords, for
   all identifiers in all contexts, because we can identify typos from the
   lexing stage before we even reach the parser.
 * It frees up `.` for use as a binary operator, should we so desire.

### Operators rationale

We use a strict "max munch" rule for operators, without regard for Carbon's
current operator set. This requires parentheses in code that would apply
multiple prefix or postfix operators in a row, such as `-*p`, but gives us the
advantage that adding new operators is always a non-breaking change for all
existing Carbon code.

### Compound brackets rationale

We intend for each notation in Carbon code to have exactly one meaning, and for
the language to be evolvable in new directions. However, there are only three
easily-typable sets of brackets for most Carbon programmers -- four if you
include `<>`, which introduces a host of problems. We already know of more than
this many different kinds of bracketed region we wish to support, and have
started trying to play syntactic games to treat them as the same thing in order
to get back down to only three.

Including compound brackets allows us to solve these problems: we have an
unbounded set of potential bracket pairs, without substantially increasing the
complexity of parsing Carbon code. The bracket terminator characters are chosen
such that a bracket followed by an operator can be easily visually separated by
a reader of Carbon code: even in a tricky case such as `[*|*p|*]`, the
expression `*p` within the `[*|` ... `|*]` brackets is reasonably readable. And
we will not need to resort to three-character brackets unless we exhaust our 9
kinds of two-character brackets.

Support for compound brackets requires that we make a concession: the bracket
terminator characters cannot be used within prefix or postfix operators. For
the two chosen symbols, this is unlikely to present a problem.

### Bracket indentation rationale

We wish for Carbon to provide good error diagnosis and recovery, to support
tooling and analysis of incomplete source files, and to reject cases where we
can be confident that the intent of the programmer is not captured by the code.
To support these goals, we require that the indentation of code reflects the
logical structure of the code, and one of the ways we achieve this is by
requiring that the contents of a bracketed region are at least as indented as
the opening line of that bracketed region. For example, given:

```carbon
fn f() {
  if (cond) {
    // ...
}

fn g() {
```

we can be confident that the intention was for the closing brace on line 4 to
match the opening brace on line 1, not the opening brace on line 2. By
recognizing this early, we can produce improved diagnostics indicating that a
closing brace was missing, and tools that perform semantic analysis of
potentially-incomplete source files can recover by imagining that an additional
closing brace appeared before line 4.

This indentation rule is insufficient to fully ensure that our interpretation
of the program matches the programmer's intent and the reader's expectations.
Generally, we wish for all continuation lines of any grammatical construct to
be at least as indented as the first line in that construct.

## Alternatives considered

### Block comment alternatives

We considered various different options for block comments. Our primary goal
was to permit commenting out a large body of Carbon code, which may or may not
be well-formed. Alternatives considered included:

 * Fully line-oriented block comments, which would remove lines without regard
   for whether they are nested within a string literal, with the novel feature
   of allowing some of the contents of a block string literal to be commented
   out.
 * Fully lexed block comments, in which a token sequence between the opening
   and closing comment marker is produced and discarded, with the lexing rules
   relaxed somewhat to avoid rejecting ill-formed code. This would be analogous
   to C and C++'s `#if 0` ... `#endif`.

### String alternatives

Block string literals could use explicit characters in the body to indicate the
amount of leading whitespace to be removed:

```carbon
var String: x = """
  |  starts with two spaces.
  """;
```

This would allow the correct indentation to be determined as soon as the first
line after the opening `"""` is seen. However, this adds lexical complexity,
and most of the same benefit can be derived by simply requiring the indentation
of the string literal to be greater than that of its contents.

We could choose to include the newline before the terminating `"""` as part of
the literal contents. However, expectations for whether it should be included
vary, and appear to be somewhat evenly split between the two options. If the
terminating newline is included in the string, it would be natural to permit
the terminating `"""` to not be preceded by a newline, which removes the most
natural vehicle by which we can determine the proper indentation to remove from
each line.

### Operators alternatives

We could use a "max munch" rule for operators that is restricted to only
recognize a known set of Carbon operators. This would permit constructs such as
`-*p` or `**p` without additional brackets or whitespace. This would improve
the language ergonomics, but would make language evolution more difficult.
