# Executable Semantics Structured Fuzzer

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

## Overview

Fuzz testing is based on generating a large amount of random inputs for a
software component in order to trigger bugs and unexpected behavior. Basic
fuzzing uses randomly generated arrays of bytes as inputs, which works great for
some applications but is problematic for testing the logic that operates on
highly structured data, as most of random inputs are immediately rejected as
invalid before any interesting parts of the code get a chance to run.

Structured fuzzing addresses this issue by ensuring the randomly generated data
is itself structured, and as such has a high chance of presenting a valid input.

`executable_semantics_fuzzer` is a structured fuzzer based on
[libprotobuf-mutator](https://github.com/google/libprotobuf-mutator), which is a
library to randomly mutate
[protobuffers](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf).

The input to the fuzzer is an instance of `Carbon::Fuzzing::Carbon` proto
randomly generated by the `libprotobuf-mutator` framework.
`executable_semantics_fuzzer` converts the proto to a Carbon source code string,
and tries to parse and execute the code using `executable_semantics`
implementation.

## Fuzzer data format

`libprotobuf-mutator` supports fuzzer inputs in either text or binary protocol
buffer format. `executable_semantics_fuzzer` uses binary proto format with
`Carbon` proto message definition in `common/fuzzing/Carbon.proto`.

Binary protocol buffer format works better in the presence of frequent changes
to protocol buffer definition. For example, renaming a field is 100% backwards
compatible, meaning the instances of `Carbon` proto serialized before renaming
was done will continue to work as before with no reqired changes, whereas old
field name will be treated as an error by the text protocol buffer parser, and
the field and all its contents will be ignored.

As an additional bonus, binary proto format is also a bit faster than text proto
format.

## Running the fuzzer

The fuzzer can be run in 'unit test' mode, where the fuzzer executes on each
input file from the `fuzzer_corpus/` folder, or in 'fuzzing' mode, where the
fuzzer will keep generating random inputs and executing the logic on them until
a crash is triggered, or forever in a bug-free program ;).

To run in 'unit test' mode:

```bash
bazel test --config=proto-fuzzer --test_output=all //executable_semantics/fuzzing:executable_semantics_fuzzer
```

To run in 'fuzzing' mode:

```bash
bazel build --config=proto-fuzzer //executable_semantics/fuzzing:executable_semantics_fuzzer

executable_semantics_fuzzer
```

It's also possible to run the fuzzer on a single input:

```bash
executable_semantics_fuzzer /tmp/crash.binaryproto
```

## Investigating a crash

To reproduce a crash, run the fuzzer on the crashing input as described above.

A separate tool called `fuzzverter` can be used for things like converting a
crashing input to Carbon source code for running `executable_semantics` on the
code directly.

To convert a binary proto file containing `Fuzzing::Carbon` message to Carbon
source:

```bash
fuzzverter --from=binary_proto --input /tmp/crash.binaryproto --to=carbon_source
```

To convert a binary proto file containing `Fuzzing::Carbon` message to a textual
protocol buffer representation (text proto):

```bash
fuzzverter --from=binary_proto --input /tmp/crash.binaryproto --to=text_proto
```

## Generating new fuzzer corpus entries

The ability of the fuzzing framework to generate 'interesting' inputs can be
improved by providing 'seed' inputs known as the fuzzer corpus. The inputs need
to be in the binary proto format, and contain an instance of `Fuzzing::Carbon`
proto message.

To generate a binary proto from Carbon source:

```bash
fuzzverter --from=carbon_source --input /tmp/crash.carbon --to=binary_proto --output /tmp/crash.binaryproto
```

To generate a text proto from Carbon source:

```bash
fuzzverter --from=carbon_source --input /tmp/crash.carbon --to=text_proto
```
