clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/list.rst, before:

.. title:: clang-tidy - Clang-Tidy Checks

Clang-Tidy Checks
=========================

.. toctree::   
   cert-dcl50-cpp
   cert-err52-cpp
   cert-err58-cpp
   cert-err60-cpp
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-bounds-array-to-pointer-decay
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-bounds-constant-array-index
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-bounds-pointer-arithmetic
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-const-cast
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-cstyle-cast
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-reinterpret-cast
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-static-cast-downcast
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-union-access
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-vararg
   google-build-explicit-make-pair
   google-build-namespaces
   google-build-using-namespace
   google-explicit-constructor
   google-global-names-in-headers
   google-readability-braces-around-statements
   google-readability-casting
   google-readability-function-size
   google-readability-namespace-comments
   google-readability-redundant-smartptr-get
   google-readability-todo
   google-runtime-int
   google-runtime-member-string-references
   google-runtime-memset
   google-runtime-operator
   llvm-header-guard
   llvm-include-order
   llvm-namespace-comment
   llvm-twine-local
   misc-argument-comment
   misc-assert-side-effect
   misc-assign-operator-signature
   misc-bool-pointer-implicit-conversion
   misc-definitions-in-headers
   misc-inaccurate-erase
   misc-inefficient-algorithm
   misc-macro-parentheses
   misc-macro-repeated-side-effects
   misc-move-constructor-init
   misc-new-delete-overloads
   misc-noexcept-move-constructor
   misc-non-copyable-objects
   misc-sizeof-container
   misc-static-assert
   misc-string-integer-assignment
   misc-swapped-arguments
   misc-throw-by-value-catch-by-reference
   misc-undelegated-constructor
   misc-uniqueptr-reset-release
   misc-unused-alias-decls
   misc-unused-parameters
   misc-unused-raii
   modernize-loop-convert
   modernize-make-unique
   modernize-pass-by-value
   modernize-redundant-void-arg
   modernize-replace-auto-ptr
   modernize-shrink-to-fit
   modernize-use-auto
   modernize-use-default
   modernize-use-nullptr
   modernize-use-override
   readability-braces-around-statements
   readability-container-size-empty
   readability-else-after-return
   readability-function-size
   readability-identifier-naming
   readability-implicit-bool-cast
   readability-inconsistent-declaration-parameter-name
   readability-named-parameter
   readability-redundant-smartptr-get
   readability-redundant-string-cstr
   readability-simplify-boolean-expr
   readability-uniqueptr-delete-release

Commit message:

Add documentation redirects for clang-tidy checkers that are exposed under multiple checker names. Updates the Python script for adding checks to properly handle these aliases.
llvm-svn: 257347

clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/list.rst, after:

.. title:: clang-tidy - Clang-Tidy Checks

Clang-Tidy Checks
=========================

.. toctree::   
   cert-dcl03-c (redirects to misc-static-assert) <cert-dcl03-c>
   cert-dcl50-cpp
   cert-dcl54-cpp (redirects to misc-new-delete-overloads) <cert-dcl54-cpp>
   cert-dcl59-cpp (redirects to google-build-namespaces) <cert-dcl59-cpp>
   cert-err52-cpp
   cert-err58-cpp
   cert-err60-cpp
   cert-err61-cpp (redirects to misc-throw-by-value-catch-by-reference) <cert-err61-cpp>
   cert-fio38-c (redirects to misc-non-copyable-objects) <cert-fio38-c>
   cert-oop11-cpp (redirects to misc-move-constructor-init) <cert-oop11-cpp>
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-bounds-array-to-pointer-decay
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-bounds-constant-array-index
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-bounds-pointer-arithmetic
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-const-cast
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-cstyle-cast
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-reinterpret-cast
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-static-cast-downcast
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-union-access
   cppcoreguidelines-pro-type-vararg
   google-build-explicit-make-pair
   google-build-namespaces
   google-build-using-namespace
   google-explicit-constructor
   google-global-names-in-headers
   google-readability-braces-around-statements
   google-readability-casting
   google-readability-function-size
   google-readability-namespace-comments
   google-readability-redundant-smartptr-get
   google-readability-todo
   google-runtime-int
   google-runtime-member-string-references
   google-runtime-memset
   google-runtime-operator
   llvm-header-guard
   llvm-include-order
   llvm-namespace-comment
   llvm-twine-local
   misc-argument-comment
   misc-assert-side-effect
   misc-assign-operator-signature
   misc-bool-pointer-implicit-conversion
   misc-definitions-in-headers
   misc-inaccurate-erase
   misc-inefficient-algorithm
   misc-macro-parentheses
   misc-macro-repeated-side-effects
   misc-move-constructor-init
   misc-new-delete-overloads
   misc-noexcept-move-constructor
   misc-non-copyable-objects
   misc-sizeof-container
   misc-static-assert
   misc-string-integer-assignment
   misc-swapped-arguments
   misc-throw-by-value-catch-by-reference
   misc-undelegated-constructor
   misc-uniqueptr-reset-release
   misc-unused-alias-decls
   misc-unused-parameters
   misc-unused-raii
   modernize-loop-convert
   modernize-make-unique
   modernize-pass-by-value
   modernize-redundant-void-arg
   modernize-replace-auto-ptr
   modernize-shrink-to-fit
   modernize-use-auto
   modernize-use-default
   modernize-use-nullptr
   modernize-use-override
   readability-braces-around-statements
   readability-container-size-empty
   readability-else-after-return
   readability-function-size
   readability-identifier-naming
   readability-implicit-bool-cast
   readability-inconsistent-declaration-parameter-name
   readability-named-parameter
   readability-redundant-smartptr-get
   readability-redundant-string-cstr
   readability-simplify-boolean-expr
   readability-uniqueptr-delete-release
