<!--
Part of the Carbon Language, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.
See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

# Carbon: Language Design Overview

- **Authors:** Chandler Carruth
- **[Tracking issue](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/18)**
- **Status:** Draft
- **Created:** 2020-05-19

**_PLEASE_ DO NOT SHARE OUTSIDE CARBON FORUMS**

## Problem

We need some vaguely consistent shared understanding of the language design as
a whole. The goal is merely consistency in discussions, in-progress syntax, and
general approach. It in no way needs reliably to reflect the end state (either
desired or realized). Instead, it should evolve as each area matures and becomes
concrete, while providing an overarching overview that connects the language
together, and the consistent background that we all can refer back to during
discussions.

To reiterate, the goal is not to propose that anything here is necessarily
*correct*, but merely *useful as a starting point* for subsequent discussion.
Each and every aspect of the suggested overview should be subject to careful
examination and justification before it becomes a settled plan of record.

## Background

Many of the ideas here stem from discussions between several of the initial
people working on Carbon over several years. That doesn't make them good, but
may give some context on where they came from. They are also heavily informed by
the experience several of us have both working on the Clang C++ frontend and
several C++ codebases including those of LLVM and Clang themselves.

## Proposal

See the language design overview document.

## Alternatives considered

### No in-progress design overview

The primary alternative is to avoid even having a draft or in-progress design of
this form until each constituent component is more thoroughly conceived and
considered. For some, this would have avoid anchoring and getting stuck
discussing aspects of the language that haven't yet been fully explored.
However, for others lacking this overview prevents them from understanding the
shape as a whole, even it as evolves, and can lead to signifcant confusion and
an inability to discuss fully.

The compromise chosen is to have the risk in-progress design and simply work to
resist both anchoring and distraction stemming from it. We want to get the
benefits we can here while minimizing the cost.
