# Add code review guidelines

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

- **Status:** WIP
- **Created:** 2020-06-02

## Problem

Carbon should ensure that all checked-in changes to the repository are properly
code reviewed, and that the process for code review is effective across a number
of dimensions:

- Ensure high quality of code, documentation, and other artifacts. We consider
  these all "code reviews" regardless of whether the final artefact is "code" in
  a technical sense.
- Encourage broad participation and contribution to the community through code
  reviews.
- Ensure code reviews are inclusive, respectful, and welcoming.
- Have clear, discoverable, and mechanically enforced (where possible) rules for
  who _can_, who _should_, and who _must_ review any particular change.

## Background

General code review:

- Chapter 9 "Code Review" in
  _[Software Engineering at Google](https://www.amazon.com/Software-Engineering-Google-Lessons-Programming/dp/1492082791)_
- [Respectful Code Reviews (Chromium)](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/master/docs/cr_respect.md)
- [Compassionate--Yet Candid--Code Reviews (video)](https://youtu.be/Ea8EiIPZvh0)
- [The Standard of Code Review](https://google.github.io/eng-practices/review/reviewer/standard.html)
- [How We Do Code Review](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/appcenter/how-the-visual-studio-mobile-center-team-does-code-review/)
- [Code Reviewing in the Trenches: Understanding Challenges, Best Practices and Tool Needs](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/MS-Code-Review-Tech-Report-MSR-TR-2016-27.pdf)

Specific GitHub tooling:

- [About code owners](https://help.github.com/en/github/creating-cloning-and-archiving-repositories/about-code-owners)
- [Reviewing changes in pull requests](https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests)

## Proposal

Add a [code review guide](/docs/project/code_review.md) to the project, an
reference it from our contributing guide and pull request workflow
documentation.

## Alternatives considered

### Post-commit review

Some projects (LLVM for example) use _post-commit_ review for some changes. This
has both pros and cons.

Pros:

- Enables sustaining velocity in the face of high latency in code review.
  - Little need to rebase or resolve merge conflicts due to immediately landing
    patches even while under review.
  - Cross-developer dependencies don't create challenges.
- Optimizes commit velocity amongst a small group of developers with extensive
  experience working together and minimal review comments on others' code.

Cons:

- Does not meaningfully scale beyond small group of developers with pre-existing
  shared understanding of desired form of code.
  - Relies on relative infrequency of needing code review comments.
  - Developers largely need to be well aligned and reliably writing code others
    would already approve.
- Disincentivizes code review relative to writing code.
  - This effect is strong enough to create a significant fraction of commits
    that simply see no reviev in the LLVM community.
- Creates significant barriers for new contributors.
  - In practice, existing contributors are much more likely te be able to
    accurately create post-commit review passing changes than new contributors.
  - Because of this, new contributors will have a very difficult time joining
    the community.
  - This has specifically been cited by people joining the LLVM community.

### Skipping review when no functionality is changed (NFC commits)

Another practice popular in the LLVM community is to skip pre-commit review for
changes for which "no functionality changes" or NFC commits. Common examples are
reformatting or basic code cleanup. The idea is that these are exceedingly lower
risk compared changes to functionality.

Pros:

- Can avoid waiting for a review on trivial cleanups and refactorings.
  - May be especially useful as they tend to be merge conflict prone and likely
    to be lead-ups to changes sent out for review.
    - The advantage is lessened when using stacked reviews to parallelize them.
- Avoid spending reviewer time on more trivial changes.
  - Unclear how much time this is as NFC changes are typically relatively fast
    to review due to their nature. Deciding "did it change behavior?" is easier
    than deciding "given that it changes behavior, is the change good?".

Cons:

- No concrete and objective rubric for whether or not a change is NFC, and
  whether it perhaps is significant enough to still warrant review.
  - Debating this adds a new cost to the entire process.
  - In some cases, deciding whether a change is NFC roughly requires a code
    review, making it pointless to skip the code review.
  - A specific utiity of code review is to discover when something _unexpected_
    happens. The fact that the author _believes_ a change is NFC doesn't address
    this utility as the unexpected thing may be the functionality changed.
- Loses the knowledge sharing benefit of code review for cleanups and
  refactorings.
  - Especially unfortunate as these are exactly the kinds of changes often
    recommend for people starting to get familiar with a project.
- Fails to ensure consistency or easy of understanding of the code.
  - Despite not changing functionality, a change may decrease how easily
    understood the code is or may move it to be inconsistent with the wider
    codebase.
  - Avoiding these two things are some of the primary goals of code review.
