# Carbon: Proposal tracking

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

**_PLEASE_ DO NOT SHARE OUTSIDE CARBON FORUMS**

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/44)

## Table of contents

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->


- [Problem](#problem)
- [Background](#background)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Overview](#overview)
  - [Open question: Do we use a Google Docs-centric or GitHub Markdown-centric flow?](#open-question-do-we-use-a-google-docs-centric-or-github-markdown-centric-flow)
    - [Option: Google Docs-centric flow](#option-google-docs-centric-flow)
      - [Overview](#overview-1)
      - [Flow summary](#flow-summary)
      - [Pros/Cons](#proscons)
    - [Option: GitHub Markdown-centric flow](#option-github-markdown-centric-flow)
      - [Overview](#overview-2)
      - [Flow summary](#flow-summary-1)
      - [Pros/Cons](#proscons-1)
- [Details](#details)
  - [Carbon language shared drive](#carbon-language-shared-drive)
    - [Main shared drive](#main-shared-drive)
    - [Proposals (shared folder)](#proposals-shared-folder)
    - [Proposal Archive (folder in shared drive)](#proposal-archive-folder-in-shared-drive)
  - [Google Docs proposal ACLs](#google-docs-proposal-acls)
- [Markdown-specific questions](#markdown-specific-questions)
  - [Open question: Where should proposals be stored in GitHub?](#open-question-where-should-proposals-be-stored-in-github)
    - [Option: Proposal archive GitHub repo (carbon-proposals)](#option-proposal-archive-github-repo-carbon-proposals)
    - [Option: Store proposals in the repository they affect](#option-store-proposals-in-the-repository-they-affect)
  - [Open question: Should we push comments to focus on GitHub?](#open-question-should-we-push-comments-to-focus-on-github)
    - [Common principles](#common-principles)
    - [Option: Push high-level comments to Discourse Forums](#option-push-high-level-comments-to-discourse-forums)
    - [Option: Push high-level comments to GitHub](#option-push-high-level-comments-to-github)
    - [Option: Give no guidance, see what happens](#option-give-no-guidance-see-what-happens)
  - [Open question: Should there be a tracking issue?](#open-question-should-there-be-a-tracking-issue)
    - [Common principles](#common-principles-1)
    - [Option: Tracking issue for all proposals](#option-tracking-issue-for-all-proposals)
    - [Option: Don't require tracking issues](#option-dont-require-tracking-issues)
  - [Open question: Should declined/deferred proposals be committed?](#open-question-should-declineddeferred-proposals-be-committed)
    - [Common principles](#common-principles-2)
    - [Option: Do not commit declined/deferred proposals](#option-do-not-commit-declineddeferred-proposals)
    - [Option: Commit declined/deferred proposals](#option-commit-declineddeferred-proposals)
- [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
  - [Use a shared drive for everything](#use-a-shared-drive-for-everything)
- [Appendix](#appendix)
  - [General concern about multiple Markdown flavors](#general-concern-about-multiple-markdown-flavors)
  - [Google Docs vs GitHub comment flow comparison](#google-docs-vs-github-comment-flow-comparison)
    - [Comment clustering](#comment-clustering)
    - [Basic comments](#basic-comments)
    - [Suggesting edits](#suggesting-edits)
  - [Google Docs add-ons](#google-docs-add-ons)
    - [Docs to Markdown](#docs-to-markdown)
    - [Code blocks](#code-blocks)
    - [Advanced Find & Replace](#advanced-find--replace)
  - [Markdown editing](#markdown-editing)
    - [StackEdit](#stackedit)
  - [GitHub Markdown syntax highlighting](#github-markdown-syntax-highlighting)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Problem

How should we:

- Draft proposals?
- Store under review proposals?
- Archive proposals?

Each of these is a distinct, important step. We may be able to use the same
storage for multiple steps.

## Background

One thing that is _not_ under question is that we will have accepted proposals
in Markdown. This is critical, as we are essentially only delaying when a
proposal goes to Markdown.

The evolution process expects that community contributors will author proposals
for review by the core team. Things to consider are:

- How easy is it for an author to write a proposal?
  - What if there are multiple contributors to a proposal?
- How easy is it to comment on a proposal?
  - What about small typo fixes?
- How do we prevent unwanted edits during the comment process?
- How much work does it take to convert a proposal into a final doc edit?
- How do we prevent edits after a decision is complete?

In any situation, it's necessary that proposals be clearly contributed to Carbon
(even if in a draft phase, even if never accepted), and have an appropriate
license attached.

Although the evolution document currently makes statements about how to manage
proposals, changes in approval from this doc may affect the evolution process.
Explicit wording changes aren't outlined here because they are assumed to be
part of executing this proposal rather than the substance of this proposal.

For reference, a version of this proposal is also available in
[GitHub](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-proposals/blob/d1946fab824742b4857fa74ffc1b9fe9af37375d/proposals/p0001.md).

## Proposal

### Overview

This proposal presents two possible flows: one Google Docs-centric, one
Markdown-centric. This is an open question.

In either case, it's assumed that we will want a Carbon language shared drive
for any Google Docs we may create, and a Proposal archive GitHub repo.

### Open question: Do we use a Google Docs-centric or GitHub Markdown-centric flow?

**Decision:** GitHub Markdown-centric flow

All documents will end up in Markdown. Some members of the core team have a
stated preference for reviewing proposals in Google Docs, and some have a
preference for Markdown. No other clear options exist. This would yield two
possible flows:

#### Option: Google Docs-centric flow

##### Overview

- Draft proposals: Google Docs
- Under review proposals: Google Docs
- Archive proposals: Google Docs + PDF
- Final format: Markdown

##### Flow summary

For reviewing a proposal:

- Authors create a Google Doc in the Proposals shared folder.
  - Authors may want to trim down edit access, leaving only comment access.
- When ready for review, the authors share the Google Doc on Discourse Forums.
  - Community comments on the Google Doc.
- To move for a decision, ownership is transferred to a review manager.
  - The review manager trims down all access to comment access.
- When a decision is reached, the review manager updates the doc and moves it to
  the Proposal Archive folder in the Carbon language shared drive.
- A PDF is saved to the carbon-proposals GitHub repo.
- The author converts any long-term documentation portions of the doc to
  Markdown.

If the proposal needs to be checked later to figure out why a decision was made:

- Pragmatically, the PDF should have the same viewable content as the Google
  Doc, and so can be used.
- The Google Doc's comments will be a mess to read, and so should likely be
  treated as inaccessible later.
- The edit history of a Google Doc is only visible to users with edit access.
  Since most people will have comment-only or view-only access to reviewed docs,
  we should treat edit history as not accessible.

##### Pros/Cons

Pros:

- Supports collaborative editing.
- Commenting in Docs is a slightly better UI, even though the commenting
  workflows are equivalent.
- Images can easily be embedded in the Google Doc, without needing separate
  files.

Neutral:

- Has an easier [suggested edit workflow](#suggesting-edits) than GitHub.
  - For commenters, this may be a pro because they can see their suggested edit
    as they make it.
  - For the author, this is a mixed bag:
    - When a suggestion is for multiple, fragmented edits, it's harder to read.
      - e.g., "foo ~~bar ~~baaz bang~~wiz ~~bing" -> "foo baaz bangbing"
    - It's easier to accept changes.
    - It's harder to comment on changes, as the change is still visible and
      hiding the original state of the doc.
      - This is especially true when trying to respond to comments by others on
        a suggested edit, as you can't _both_ have a discussion _and_
        apply/reject the edit.
    - It's harder to make alternative edits and/or reject changes, as it
      effectively resolves the comment thread and hinders further discussion.
  - For other readers, this is likely a con: it's harder to read the original
    state of the doc that's been suggested on, and it's not clear how the author
    will respond.

Cons:

- Documents will go through at least three different file formats (Docs, PDF,
  Markdown).
  - Docs->Markdown conversion has limited tooling support.
  - Comment history will be lost on conversions.
  - Using different formats for proposals and documentation/specification
    creates additional work when pulling text into a proposal to suggest
    modifications, and when applying those modifications.
  - Any differences between the text in different formats will be difficult to
    notice, particularly if the author makes a change when converting long-term
    documentation from Docs to Markdown.
- Difficult to manage access control on files.
  - Docs does not provide access to version history (desirable) without granting
    full edit access (undesirable).
  - Shared drives combine permissions for adding files to a folder and editing
    files. Permissions can also only be _added_, not _removed_, from individual
    docs. As a result, contributors who can create new proposals will also
    receive the ability to edit all proposals.
  - Docs will not automatically mirror permissions if we use two different
    sharing systems (shared drive and shared folder).
- Difficult to archive documents as read-only.
  - If we set archived documents to be view-only, users won't be able to read
    comments. At that point, the PDF version that we plan to commit to the
    Proposal archive GitHub repo is sufficient, and we could delete the
    proposal.
  - If we set archived documents to allow commenting, then users can comment on
    and add suggested edits to archived documents. Only review managers could
    close suggested edits. This could confuse the history of the doc, and stop
    archives from looking read-only.
  - In any case, archived documents would not be editable, and so revision
    history could not be seen.
- Managing comments over time is infeasible.
  - It's infeasible to point people to old comment threads, to suggest they read
    and engage if they disagree with the original request.
  - Even identifying _whether_ a comment led to a particular change is
    infeasible.
  - Comments vanish if the text they're on is removed.
  - There is no way to quickly check for unresponded comments: instead, authors
    will need to repeatedly crawl the doc. This is exacerbated by process advice
    that the commenter be left to decide whether to resolve comments, or
    slow-to-respond commenters.
- No support for seeing deltas.
  - Only editors can see the delta. However, it should be expected that only the
    author is an editor.
  - Even if deltas were accessible, Docs delta support requires extra work on
    the part of a doc editor to set up markers in the version history.
- Restricted support for extensibility.
  - Proposals frequently have duplicated/boilerplate text that the authors may
    need to rewrite in bulk, e.g. when renaming something. Google Docs has
    built-in regex search. However, regex replace with capture groups isn't
    directly supported, so users would need to learn and use Google Apps Script
    to do the replacement.
  - When URLs need to be replaced, Google Docs has _no_ support. Authors must
    audit every URL.
- No low-friction support for formatted code blocks and inline code snippets.
  - [Extensions exist](#google-docs-add-ons); we'll probably want to recommend a
    specific extension to the community.
- Intra-document links break frequently, just from moving headers.
  - It's also difficult to determine when an intra-document link is broken.
    There doesn't seem to be support (built-in or add-on) for identifying
    issues.
  - It's also not supported to search through links, so even if the author knows
    what they're breaking, they won't be able to find it.
- Google Docs comment syntax is essentially text-only.
  - Syntax can interfere with "\*" insertion in code snippets due to bolding
    confusion.
- May enhance Google-centric views of Carbon.
  - Swift and Rust use Markdown-centric flows.
- Some companies may block Google Docs, because it's a file transfer service.
  - It's unclear how prevalent this would be. GitHub may also be blocked under
    similar security rules, but it's a requirement for participation whereas
    Google Docs is avoidable.
  - Ref:
    [[1]](https://community.cisco.com/t5/web-security/blocking-google-docs/td-p/3376518),
    [[2]](https://www.reddit.com/r/sysadmin/comments/2kwyhk/block_google_docs/),
    [[3]](https://mybroadband.co.za/forum/threads/google-drive-blocked-at-work-work-around.809132/)
- Some individuals may refuse to use Google Docs over privacy (or other)
  concerns.
  - We've considered creating a GSuite domain for Carbon contributor accounts to
    help address this. However, it may not address everyone's concerns.

#### Option: GitHub Markdown-centric flow

##### Overview

- Draft proposals: Markdown, possibly in Google Docs (but not required)
- Under review proposals: Markdown with review comments via GitHub
- Archive proposals: Markdown
- Final format: Markdown

##### Flow summary

For reviewing a proposal:

- Authors prepare a markdown doc using their favored tooling.
  - This could be [a WYSIWYG markdown editor](#markdown-editing), or Google docs
    for collaboration.
- Authors create a pull request with the markdown doc, to the carbon-proposals
  GitHub repo.
  - Community comments on the pull request.
- To move for a decision, no special action is taken.
- When a decision is reached, the review manager ensures the markdown doc is
  updated appropriately and approves the pull request.

If the proposal needs to be checked later to figure out why a decision was made:

- The committed markdown represents the final state of the proposal.
- The pull request may be viewed to read through comments, even after it is
  merged.
- The pull request will have edit history publicly visible.
  - GitHub has a nice renderer for markdown diffs.

##### Pros/Cons

Pros:

- No need to convert file formats.
  - Markdown reviews can be committed directly, putting all history in one
    place.
  - When dealing with a proposal that results in separate long-term
    documentation, any differences between proposal text and long-term text will
    be relatively easy to see in a diff.
- Access control is straightforward, determined by location.
- Referring to older comments is feasible.
  - There may be some cases where comments disappear in certain situations, but
    these problems should be avoidable.
- The archival copy of a document will include an easy link to comment history.
- Easy to see Markdown-formatted deltas in GitHub.
- The style of all documents can be updated centrally by changing a style sheet.
- Multiple comments may be sent together in a review.
  - Comments may also be sent individually as in Docs.
- GitHub comment syntax supports Markdown, allowing code in comments.
- Multi-author editing is possible by using a shared GitHub branch as a source.
  - This may still be less convenient than Google Docs flows, but multi-author
    proposals could still use Google Docs to collaborate on the Markdown.

Neutral:

- Has a more difficult [suggested edit workflow](#suggesting-edits) than Google
  Docs.
  - For commenters, this may be a con, as it takes a little more work to add a
    suggested edit. This may still lead to fewer suggested edits.
  - For the author, this is a mixed bag:
    - Whereas Google Docs may often see multiple, fragmented edits for the same
      sentence, commenters would be more likely to suggest them together (a
      pro).
    - It's seamless to comment on changes, as it follows the normal comment
      flow.
    - It's seamless to make alternative edits and/or reject changes.
    - The author may need to do extra reformatting/word wrapping after accepting
      a Markdown change, which Docs would handle internally.
  - For other readers, this is likely a pro: the current state of the doc
    remains visible.

Cons:

- GitHub comments on pull requests can be difficult to find in certain
  situations.
  - Comments can disappear when a pull request is rebased and force-pushed.
  - Comments generally don't get tracked across revisions to a pull request.
  - If we disallow force-pushes on pull requests, they are probably okay most of
    the time.
- Can't comment on the rendered Markdown, only the raw Markdown.
- Images need to be stored separately from the main Markdown file.
  - Final documentation may or may not need the images; they may only be added
    to explain the proposal. i.e., this may be extra work without later benefit.

## Details

### Carbon language shared drive

#### Main shared drive

A shared drive will be used as a nexus for any Google Docs materials. This
mainly offers a central point for contributors to locate materials, as most will
not be able to modify contents.

A shared drive should be assumed to be present, regardless of whether we choose
a Google Docs-centric flow: if we allow/encourage the use of Google Docs for
collaborative editing in a Markdown-centric flow, we should still provide
storage.

Access controls:

- Managers: a minimal set (chandlerc + review managers?) to prevent accidental
  edits.
  - _Not_ the entire core team, in order to discourage the core team from using
    privileges not accessible to the rest of the community (including
    sub-teams).
- Content managers: the review manager group, so that they can archive
  proposals.
- Contributors: none - does not provide sufficiently distinct access from
  content managers.
- Commenters: full community
- Viewers: none

#### Proposals (shared folder)

Community members need to be able to add proposals to the shared folder. This
will be available as a shortcut from the main shared drive.

In shared folders, edit access to the folder allows adding/moving/removing
files, but doesn't grant control over the actual _file_, which is still owned by
the individual creator. Unlike shared drives, proposal authors can remove edit
access from individual files.

Access controls:

- Owner: chandlerc
- Editors: full community
- Commenters/viewers: none (non-public)

#### Proposal Archive (folder in shared drive)

The archive will be used to store reviewed proposals. This will mainly make
comments on proposals available for future reference.

To allow viewing comments, comment access _must_ be granted: Google Docs
comments are not visible to users with view-only access. At the same time, this
means contributors will still be able to comment on archived docs: this should
be discouraged.

Access controls:

- Inherited from Carbon language shared drive.

### Google Docs proposal ACLs

In this setup, pending proposals go into the Proposals shared folder, where
they'll still have their own ACLs.

Note that, in the Markdown-centric flow, this is generally not relevant: using
Google Docs is optional and may often be skipped.

Access controls:

- Owner: proposal author (transferred to review manager, for proposals going to
  decision)
- Editors: any collaborators
- Commenters: community
- Viewers: none

## Markdown-specific questions

### Open question: Where should proposals be stored in GitHub?

**Decision**: Store proposals in the repository they affect

#### Option: Proposal archive GitHub repo (carbon-proposals)

In this approach, the review managers are presumed to be responsible for commits
to the proposal archive.

Access controls:

- Commit privileges: review managers

Pros:

- Easy to find pending proposals; just look at the carbon-proposals issue
  tracker.
- All proposals will be uniquely numbered.
- No need for a proposal label: everything's a proposal.

Cons:

- Proposals affect other repos; may miss opportunities to combine changes.
- Harder to filter for proposals that are relevant to a specific repository.

#### Option: Store proposals in the repository they affect

In this approach, we would store proposals in the same repository as they
affect. e.g., a proposal about the spec would be stored in carbon-lang, while a
proposal specific to the compiler would be in carbon-toolchains. If a proposal
affected multiple repositories, we'd probably choose a single primary repository
for the proposal.

Specific to a GitHub Markdown-centric flow, we could additionally allow the
proposal's pull request to include the specific proposed changes to
documentation where appropriate, allowing for the author to avoid duplicating
text in the proposal itself.

We would likely still want a proposal document with a summary at a minimum, even
for small proposals. The summary can link to the pull request for details,
creating additional breadcrumbs for reading the full (with additional document
edits) proposal.

Rejected proposals should commit _only_ the proposal document. A link to the
pull request in the proposal document should make it easier to research
rejections. Alternatively, rejected proposals could have their pull request
abandoned, but that would leave only the tracking issue as a breadcrumb for
history.

Access controls:

- Commit privileges: normal repository access, possibly with review managers
  getting broad access in order to finalize proposals.

Pros:

- Makes it easier to demonstrate the actual changes a proposal suggests making.
- Reduces possible redundant work by the author of making changes in two places
  (the proposal, and affected documents).
- Keeps discussion about the _proposal_ and discussion about the _proposed
  changes_ on a single review thread, for most cases.
- Makes it easy to find most/all proposals relevant to a given repository.

Cons:

- Proposals would need to be tracked separately per-repo.
  - This could also end up being a pro if we get a bunch of different repos, as
    it may become easier to find relevant proposals for a given repo. It's only
    really a con for as long as we have few repos (which may last long-term, as
    having many repos may lead to other scaling problems).
- Access controls are part of the parent repo, and so will be less restricted
  than if we had a separate proposals repo.
- Proposals won't be uniquely numbered.
  - We'll need to refer to proposals with the repo, e.g., `carbon-lang/456`.
- Need to make sure we have a proposal label, to separate from non-proposal
  traffic.

### Open question: Should we push comments to focus on GitHub?

**Decision**: Push high-level comments to GitHub

#### Common principles

- Proposals will be declared on Discourse Forums at important stages; e.g.,
  asking for input on ideas, RFC, decisions, etc.
- Some discussion is expected to occur on the GitHub PR.

#### Option: Push high-level comments to Discourse Forums

We could push for high-level comments to be added on the same thread as the
Discourse Forums RFC.

Pros:

- Discourse Forums offer better interfaces for pure, non-code-comment
  discussion.
- Email notifications are easier to parse with less threading, more use of
  quotes, and "In Reply To" automation.
- More familiar for people familiar with mixed Discourse/GitHub workflows.
  - Both Rust and Swift use Discourse, and are closer to this option.
  - May also be better for people used to using email lists to discuss proposed
    changes.

Cons:

- Leads contributors to two different places for comments - some high-level
  discussion will inevitably be in GitHub.
- Contributors must read both Discourse Forums and GitHub to get context.

#### Option: Push high-level comments to GitHub

We could push for high-level comments to be added to the proposal PR, with other
discussion.

Pros:

- The GitHub PR becomes a single hub for conversation.
- More familiar for people familiar with GitHub-only workflows.

Cons:

- Discourse Forum topics cannot have "create" without "reply" permissions, so
  some high-level discussion will inevitably be in Discourse Forums.
  - We could address this by only allowing moderators to post RFCs, but that may
    be overly exclusive.
- Email notifications include only the lines of code affected, not what is being
  replied to. This will generally make it infeasible to get context from emails.
- Comment threads sometimes make it unclear what's being replied to. e.g.,
  [https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-proposals/pull/5#discussion_r423401993](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-proposals/pull/5#discussion_r423401993)
  and
  [https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-proposals/pull/5/files/a51ff951561accfb4aee403d7add6e8e69009ce1#r423401993](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-proposals/pull/5/files/a51ff951561accfb4aee403d7add6e8e69009ce1#r423401993)
  are equivalent, but the replied-to-comment is only visible in the file view.
  - This may be particularly visible as an issue if high-level discussions are
    often not line-specific.
- Not clear what to do about resolving high-level discussion comment threads.
  - If comment threads are resolved, it's harder to read them, discouraging
    third-party comment.
  - If comment threads are not resolved, they may create a bunch of noise. As
    noted above, GitHub manages the file view better than the discussion view.
  - Mixed solutions will leave it to the author to choose the balance of issues.

#### Option: Give no guidance, see what happens

Rather than trying to guide high-level discussion to a particular medium, we
could offer no guidance.

Pros:

- Less policies, more freedom.
  - Discover what happens, switch back and forth over time based on individual
    contributor preferences.

Cons:

- Pros of a primary hub are discarded. Cons of multiple hubs should be assumed
  to remain.

### Open question: Should there be a tracking issue?

**Decision**: Don't require tracking issues

#### Common principles

- Discourse Forum topics are minimally used to announce when a decision is going
  to RFC, going to decision, and the decision once made.
- The proposal's PR may be used for discussion of the proposal.

#### Option: Tracking issue for all proposals

In a workflow where there's always a tracking issue:

1. Create the tracking issue, e.g. #123.
2. Create the PR, e.g. #456, naming the proposal p0123.md after the tracking
   issue.
   1. Use GitHub features to link #123 and #456.
3. Update the status in p0123.md and labels of #123 when progressing a proposal.
4. When a decision is made, create a new PR, e.g. #789, containing the decision
   p0123-decision.md.
   2. This does not replace the Discourse Forum topic announcing a decision.
   3. Use GitHub features to link #123 and #789.
   4. Comments on the decision may go on the decision PR, similar to the
      proposal PR discussion.
5. Declined/deferred proposals may be committed or not; it doesn't matter.

Pros:

- Easy to find the full decision in p0123-decision.md.
- The PR to create the decision is clearly visible in the associated tracking
  issue.

Cons:

- The tracking issue separates more state.

#### Option: Don't require tracking issues

In a workflow where there's no need for a tracking issue (although contributors
may create them for bucketing work, they are non-essential):

1. Create the PR, e.g. #456, naming the proposal p0456.md.
2. Update the labels of #456 when progressing a proposal.
   1. Don't bother putting the status in p0456.md: people should rely on the PR
      labels since it's in the same place.
3. When a decision is made, add it as a comment to #456.
   2. This does not replace the Discourse Forum topic announcing a decision.
   3. Comments on the decision should go in Discourse Forums.
   4. The author is asked to link to the decision in p0456.md before the commit
      is approved.
4. If declined/deferred proposals are committed, it would be best to add a
   status in p0456.md before committing.

Pros:

- Lighter weight process: no tracking issue, and no need to update status in
  p0456.md.

Cons:

- Harder to store the decision in a way that clearly links it to the original
  proposal.
  - In particular, finding discussion about the decision is hard to resolve.
    Neither below ideas clearly improve on this, so preference to keep
    everything in Discourse Forum topic.
  - Could in theory have the full decision in p0456.md. Pro is it's easy to
    find, con is it makes it look more like the author's writing the decision.
  - Could keep storing p0456-decision.md. Pro is it's easy to find, con is the
    lack of association with #456 and extra file+PR. Not clear that storage
    offers enough independent value to justify.
- Restricts where discussion about a decision should occur.

### Open question: Should declined/deferred proposals be committed?

**Decision**: Do not commit declined/deferred proposals

#### Common principles

- Accepted proposals are always committed.
- We may (or may not) commit decisions for any committed proposal (accepted or
  otherwise).
  - See notes in the above open question.

#### Option: Do not commit declined/deferred proposals

Under this approach, declined/deferred proposals are never committed. Instead,
the PR is abandoned and we at most save a link to it.

Note that GitHub does (at least to some extent) retain closed PRs, even those
coming from a fork.

Pros:

- The proposals directory remains a list of only accepted proposals.
- No need to spend effort saving declined/deferred proposals.

\
Cons:

- Lose an easy way to check declined/deferred proposals for history.
  - More reliance on searching forums for history.

#### Option: Commit declined/deferred proposals

Under this approach, declined/deferred proposals are committed.

Pros:

- Easy to skim through declined/deferred proposals.

Cons:

- Finding accepted proposals may become more difficult.
  - Could put declined/deferred proposals in a different directory.
- Requires a little more effort in order to save declined/deferred proposals.

## Alternatives considered

### Use a shared drive for everything

Instead of adding a shared folder for proposals, we could instead use a shared
drive for everything. However, this puts us in a bad situation for taking in new
proposals. We would need to choose between:

- Allowing **all** community member edit access to **all** proposals.
- Requiring authors ask a review manager to create a blank proposal for them to
  edit.

Neither of these feel like great situations - they are either overly-broad or
overly-restrictive sharing, neither approximating what we actually would want,
which is for anybody in the community to easily create proposals.

## Appendix

### General concern about multiple Markdown flavors

Different markdown implementations have subtly different rendering rules for the
same input. e.g., per [CommonMark Spec](https://spec.commonmark.org/0.29/#),
table syntax is not specified, although
[GitHub uses a table extension](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/).
However, we do plan on using GitHub consistently; this only stands to confuse
users of other Markdown systems.

Choosing the Google Docs-centric flow does not eliminate this issue, since
proposals will be archived in Markdown either way.

### Google Docs vs GitHub comment flow comparison

#### Comment clustering

Google Docs only allows sending comments individually.

GitHub supports either sending comments individually or clustering multiple
comments together, as in a review.

#### Basic comments

[Google Docs](https://support.google.com/docs/answer/65129?co=GENIE.Platform%3DDesktop&hl=en):

1. Follow the link to the doc
2. Select text to comment on
3. Click on "+" to add a comment (or use keyboard shortcut)
4. Enter text
5. Click "Comment"

[GitHub](https://help.github.com/en/enterprise/2.14/user/articles/commenting-on-a-pull-request):

1. Follow the link to a pull request
2. Click on "+" next to line to comment on
3. Enter text
4. Click "Add single comment"

#### Suggesting edits

[Google Docs](https://support.google.com/docs/answer/6033474?co=GENIE.Platform%3DDesktop&hl=en):

1. Follow the link to the doc
2. Select text to suggest edit on
3. Type suggested edit

[GitHub](https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request):

1. Follow the link to a pull request
2. Click on "+" next to line to comment on
3. Optionally select multiple lines
4. Click on the left-most button
5. Edit quoted text
6. Click "Add single comment"

### Google Docs add-ons

#### Docs to Markdown

https://gsuite.google.com/marketplace/app/docs_to_markdown/700168918607

This plugin actually looks pretty good, and may actually work better than
Google's internal-only equivalent. I'm not seeing obvious downsides.

Pros:

- Provides easy conversion of Google Docs to Markdown.

Cons:

- ?

#### Code blocks

https://gsuite.google.com/marketplace/app/code_blocks/100740430168

This is another code formatting tool, but doesn't seem to work as well as
Google's internal-only equivalent. Google's internal-only equivalent happens to do some syntax highlighting, whereas Code blocks does none.

Pros:

- Public code formatting.
- Works with "Docs to Markdown" plugin to get ```-block escaping.

Cons:

- Mediocre syntax highlighting for Carbon.
- No inline `foo` highlighting, unlike Google's internal-only equivalent.
- Different highlighting from that in the eventual Markdown document.

#### Advanced Find & Replace

https://gsuite.google.com/marketplace/app/advanced_find_replace/11210842879

Advanced Find & Replace offers more advanced functionality than the built-in
features, particularly around URL and regexp support.

Pros:

- Offers improved functionality around key Google Docs friction problems.

Cons:

- 2 of 5 stars: we should not expect quality.
- \$6 purchase price may turn off contributors.
- Requires permissions that are banned by Google internally.

### Markdown editing

There are multiple markdown editing tools.

#### StackEdit

https://stackedit.io/

StackEdit may look good on the surface, but we may effectively be restricted to
using it as a WYSYWIG markdown editor, not for collaboration. For that, it's
simply one option amongst many, and not necessarily the best.

Pros:

- Provides preview when editing Markdown files.
- Provides application-specific comment support.

Cons:

- Cannot use shared Google workspaces with Google corp accounts, due to security
  restrictions. Will likely cause issues for others, too.
- Google Docs only works as passive storage.
  - StackEdit docs aren't Google Docs, comments aren't Google Docs comments.

### GitHub Markdown syntax highlighting

GitHub's syntax highlighter
[allows adding third-party extensions](https://github.com/github/linguist/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#adding-an-extension-to-a-language),
but requires them to have significant use.

Note we can't take advantage of this until Carbon is public. We may be able to
find a language with sufficiently similar syntax to
[override the language](https://github.com/github/linguist/#overrides) and get
reasonable highlighting.
