proposals/p0051.md, before:

# Goals

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/51)

## Table of contents

<!-- toc -->

- [Problem](#problem)
- [Background](#background)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Change priority of interoperability and migration](#change-priority-of-interoperability-and-migration)
  - [Address project goals differently](#address-project-goals-differently)
    - [Status quo](#status-quo)
    - [Completely remove the community priority from this document](#completely-remove-the-community-priority-from-this-document)
    - [Add project goals to the priority list](#add-project-goals-to-the-priority-list)
    - [Merge project goals and language goals](#merge-project-goals-and-language-goals)
  - [Include specific metrics](#include-specific-metrics)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

We want to have clear goals for the Carbon project, to both establish and
document where we expect Carbon to be headed. These are aspirational goals, and
we will try our best to achieve all of them. The documented goals should make it
easier for potential users to determine whether Carbon is an appropriate fit for
them.

## Background

Carbon's goals are heavily based on
["Goals and priorities for C++"](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jrpGk6Sa0bt1u1tSuZtPnVI3inr7A4c0iJC9V2I6zUA/edit).
Many thanks to the authors and contributors for helping us formulate our goals
and priorities.

This proposal was drafted in
[Docs](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MJvVIDXQrhIj6hZ7NwMDbDch9XLO2VaYrGq29E57meU/edit).

## Proposal

The proposed goals are encapsulated in
[the goals changes](/docs/project/goals.md).

## Alternatives

### Change priority of interoperability and migration

Right now, interoperability/migration is priority #7, indicating that when
trade-offs are necessary, interoperability is likely to suffer. At least some
parties believe it should be somewhere in the top 3 priorities, perhaps #1.

Pros:

- There is a consensus that interoperability is critical. Making it the top goal
  emphasizes that.

Cons:

- While interoperability is critical, similar can be said of other goals: more
  needs to be considered when deciding priority.
- There are trade-offs between goals where there is already a consensus that
  inteoperability should lose, and there aren't as many clear cases in the other
  direction.
  - Taken to extremes, making interoperability and migration a higher priority
    than evolution would suggest that Carbon should start with C++ and
    incrementally evolve from that base. We have observed areas where C++ has
    had trouble evolving, and Carbon would risk getting stuck on similar local
    maxima in order to avoid breaking existing code.

For example of where trade-offs may be seen right now:

- Carbon's set of primitive types won't match C++'s list; we currently expect
  multiple C++ types to map to single Carbon types. C++ includes
  platform-specific type sizes that likely won't be handled through primitive
  types in Carbon.
- We expect platform support priorities to differ between C/C++ and Carbon. It's
  likely that Carbon will not have as broad support, as it focuses more on
  modern versus legacy platforms.
- Templates have been argued as only being added for interoperability/migration,
  and that we could only have generics without that goal. However, templates
  don't constrain other parts of the language. While they may have readability
  or other problems, they aren't core or required in the way that other elements
  are, including primitive types.
- C++'s preprocessor macros will be replaced by metaprogramming in Carbon. It's
  not clear what migration of code using macros will look like, but some will
  likely be expanded by automation.

Overall, we believe a consensus can be formed around keeping
interoperability/migration as #7, so long as there are clear minimum
expectations for interoperability.

### Address project goals differently

A concern was raised that, while the "Governance and evolution" doc calls for
all decisions to be justified by goals, there was no clear goal to justify the
existence of things like a code of conduct. Similarly, if performance is the
highest priority, then one might decide that retaining a performance expert may
take priority over addressing their bad behavior.

To address this issue, project goals were added. They are not explicitly part of
the numeric priority list. The intent was to make it clear it's critical, while
allowing the numeric priority list to remain focused on language goals. This is
also implied in how the project goals are covered in detail before language
goals.

#### Status quo

The project goals could be addressed as-is in the proposal.

#### Completely remove the community priority from this document

We could completely remove the project goals from this document.

Pros:

- Allows this to be the "language goals" document.

Cons:

- Creates additional documents that need to be understood to parse language
  goals.
- Makes for less clear prioritization of community, increasing ambiguity on how
  community vs language design conflicts can be resolved.

#### Add project goals to the priority list

We could make the project goals part of the priority list.

Pros:

- Makes the ordering unambiguous.

Cons:

- Makes what's current a numerated list of language design goals less
  design-focused.
- Prevents saying trivial things like "performance is our top priority".
  - Unless community isn't the top priority, re-creating the conflict risk that
    led to the creating of these project goals.

#### Merge project goals and language goals

Originally, we only had one goals and priorities section. We could re-merge
project goals and language goals.

Pros:

- Makes the document shorter and more concise.
- Tooling can already be considered a priority under "Code that is easy to read,
  understand, and write", and is explicitly mentioned as part of that goal.

Cons:

- Previous setup raised objections over why the community goal wasn't part of
  the priority list.

### Include specific metrics

The goals are currently a series of rough goals, with no specific metrics to
measure them by. We've discussed adding metrics, and decided not to include them
in the goals; the expectation is that they'll be added separately as a
principle.

Commit message:

Shuffle the mention of metrics, add a little to note that this proposal includes a metrics principle.

proposals/p0051.md, after:

# Goals

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/51)

## Table of contents

<!-- toc -->

- [Problem](#problem)
- [Background](#background)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [Including specific metrics](#including-specific-metrics)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Change priority of interoperability and migration](#change-priority-of-interoperability-and-migration)
  - [Address project goals differently](#address-project-goals-differently)
    - [Status quo](#status-quo)
    - [Completely remove the community priority from this document](#completely-remove-the-community-priority-from-this-document)
    - [Add project goals to the priority list](#add-project-goals-to-the-priority-list)
    - [Merge project goals and language goals](#merge-project-goals-and-language-goals)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

We want to have clear goals for the Carbon project, to both establish and
document where we expect Carbon to be headed. These are aspirational goals, and
we will try our best to achieve all of them. The documented goals should make it
easier for potential users to determine whether Carbon is an appropriate fit for
them.

## Background

Carbon's goals are heavily based on
["Goals and priorities for C++"](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jrpGk6Sa0bt1u1tSuZtPnVI3inr7A4c0iJC9V2I6zUA/edit).
Many thanks to the authors and contributors for helping us formulate our goals
and priorities.

This proposal was drafted in
[Docs](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MJvVIDXQrhIj6hZ7NwMDbDch9XLO2VaYrGq29E57meU/edit).

## Proposal

The proposed goals are encapsulated in
[the goals changes](/docs/project/goals.md).

### Including specific metrics

The goals are currently a series of rough goals, with no specific metrics to
measure them by. We've discussed adding metrics, and decided not to include them
in the goals; the expectation is that they'll be added separately as a
principle.

This proposal does include some platform-related metrics to form the basis of
such a principle. It should be expected that more will be added in the future.

## Alternatives

### Change priority of interoperability and migration

Right now, interoperability/migration is priority #7, indicating that when
trade-offs are necessary, interoperability is likely to suffer. At least some
parties believe it should be somewhere in the top 3 priorities, perhaps #1.

Pros:

- There is a consensus that interoperability is critical. Making it the top goal
  emphasizes that.

Cons:

- While interoperability is critical, similar can be said of other goals: more
  needs to be considered when deciding priority.
- There are trade-offs between goals where there is already a consensus that
  inteoperability should lose, and there aren't as many clear cases in the other
  direction.
  - Taken to extremes, making interoperability and migration a higher priority
    than evolution would suggest that Carbon should start with C++ and
    incrementally evolve from that base. We have observed areas where C++ has
    had trouble evolving, and Carbon would risk getting stuck on similar local
    maxima in order to avoid breaking existing code.

For example of where trade-offs may be seen right now:

- Carbon's set of primitive types won't match C++'s list; we currently expect
  multiple C++ types to map to single Carbon types. C++ includes
  platform-specific type sizes that likely won't be handled through primitive
  types in Carbon.
- We expect platform support priorities to differ between C/C++ and Carbon. It's
  likely that Carbon will not have as broad support, as it focuses more on
  modern versus legacy platforms.
- Templates have been argued as only being added for interoperability/migration,
  and that we could only have generics without that goal. However, templates
  don't constrain other parts of the language. While they may have readability
  or other problems, they aren't core or required in the way that other elements
  are, including primitive types.
- C++'s preprocessor macros will be replaced by metaprogramming in Carbon. It's
  not clear what migration of code using macros will look like, but some will
  likely be expanded by automation.

Overall, we believe a consensus can be formed around keeping
interoperability/migration as #7, so long as there are clear minimum
expectations for interoperability.

### Address project goals differently

A concern was raised that, while the "Governance and evolution" doc calls for
all decisions to be justified by goals, there was no clear goal to justify the
existence of things like a code of conduct. Similarly, if performance is the
highest priority, then one might decide that retaining a performance expert may
take priority over addressing their bad behavior.

To address this issue, project goals were added. They are not explicitly part of
the numeric priority list. The intent was to make it clear it's critical, while
allowing the numeric priority list to remain focused on language goals. This is
also implied in how the project goals are covered in detail before language
goals.

#### Status quo

The project goals could be addressed as-is in the proposal.

#### Completely remove the community priority from this document

We could completely remove the project goals from this document.

Pros:

- Allows this to be the "language goals" document.

Cons:

- Creates additional documents that need to be understood to parse language
  goals.
- Makes for less clear prioritization of community, increasing ambiguity on how
  community vs language design conflicts can be resolved.

#### Add project goals to the priority list

We could make the project goals part of the priority list.

Pros:

- Makes the ordering unambiguous.

Cons:

- Makes what's current a numerated list of language design goals less
  design-focused.
- Prevents saying trivial things like "performance is our top priority".
  - Unless community isn't the top priority, re-creating the conflict risk that
    led to the creating of these project goals.

#### Merge project goals and language goals

Originally, we only had one goals and priorities section. We could re-merge
project goals and language goals.

Pros:

- Makes the document shorter and more concise.
- Tooling can already be considered a priority under "Code that is easy to read,
  understand, and write", and is explicitly mentioned as part of that goal.

Cons:

- Previous setup raised objections over why the community goal wasn't part of
  the priority list.
