# Carbon ↔ C/C++ interoperability

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

**_PLEASE_ DO NOT SHARE OUTSIDE CARBON FORUMS**

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/80)

## Table of contents

<!-- toc -->

- [Problem](#problem)
- [Background](#background)
- [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)
- [Proposal](#proposal)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

[Carbon's goals](/docs/project/goals.md) include "Interoperability with and
migration from existing C++ code". This proposal aims to address what the
interoperability portion of that goal will look like.

## Background

This proposal assumes several other proposals, which will need to be addressed.
They are outlined here to clarify that, while the interoperability structure may
assume design decisions, it's not intended to _make_ these decisions - they will
require more discussion

- Carbon will provide a form of
  [generic programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generic_programming) that
  we will refer to as "generics".
  - Generics will make implementation trade-offs consistent with Carbon's goals.
- Carbon will not provide a direct `int` equivalent built-in, particularly with
  variable size based on the target platform.
  - Instead, all integer types will be explicitly sized, e.g., `Int32`.
  - Carbon will have integer wrapping behaviors that diverge from C++.
- Carbon will provide interfaces (APIs with no concrete methods) and mix-ins (as
  a way to reuse implementations), but not C++-style inheritance, which could be
  considered to _combine_ these concepts.
- Carbon will provide "slices" of arrays.

## Acknowledgements

This borrows significantly from the structure of Swift's interoperability plan
(GitHub for
[C](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/docs/HowSwiftImportsCAPIs.md) and
[C++](https://github.com/apple/swift/blob/master/docs/CppInteroperabilityManifesto.md)).

## Proposal

See [the design](/docs/design/interoperability/README.md) for the proposal.
