# In-progress design overview

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/83)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Goals](#goals)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Single-file design overview](#single-file-design-overview)
    -   [No in-progress design overview](#no-in-progress-design-overview)
    -   [No overview of designs](#no-overview-of-designs)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

We need some vaguely consistent shared understanding of the language design as a
whole. The goal is merely consistency in discussions, in-progress syntax, and
general approach. It in no way needs reliably to reflect the end state, either
desired or realized. Instead, it should evolve as each area matures and becomes
concrete, while providing an overarching overview that connects the language
together, and the consistent background that we all can refer back to during
discussions.

## Goals

This is intended to offer a reasonable starting point for:

-   Example code.
-   Conceptualizing Carbon at a high level.
-   Reasonable, but not necessarily final, approaches to features in README.md.
    -   If any idea is obviously bad, we can clean it up here.

This proposal is not intended to achieve:

-   A whole language design.
    -   This is way too much work for a single proposal; this is a skeletal
        framework only.
    -   As we work on feature-specific designs, we may decide to use other
        approaches. That's fine: we only need somewhere to start.
    -   The summaries in README.md may be expected to change over time.
-   Feature-specific files aren't intended to be well-written or comprehensive.
    They are a quick jot of prior thoughts.
    -   We want to avoid getting stuck on language details that we should
        consider more carefully regardless. If you're passionate about a
        feature, please feel free to start a new proposal for it.
    -   Each and every aspect of the suggested overview should be subject to
        careful examination and justification before it becomes a settled plan
        of record.

## Background

Many of the ideas here stem from discussions between several of the initial
people working on Carbon over several years. That doesn't make them good, but
may give some context on where they came from. They are also heavily informed by
the experience several of us have both working on the Clang C++ frontend and
several C++ codebases including those of LLVM and Clang themselves.

## Proposal

See [the language design overview document](/docs/design/README.md).

## Alternatives considered

### Single-file design overview

We also considered putting the full design overview in one file, as in
[PR 22](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/22). This is versus
the hierarchy proposed here.

Advantages:

-   All proposed changes are in one place.
-   Easier for people to skim rationale and considered changes.

Disadvantages:

-   Encourages more single-file designs.
    -   A principle of the multi-file approach is that complex features may have
        subdirectories with their own README.md and files for sub-features,
        similar to the relationship between this design overview and features.
    -   Single-file designs may be harder to evolve long-term, as the volume of
        information contained impedes reading.

### No in-progress design overview

The primary alternative is to avoid even having a draft or in-progress design of
this form until each constituent component is more thoroughly conceived and
considered.

Advantages:

-   Avoids anchoring design on approaches that haven't yet been fully explored.
    -   Avoids getting stuck on discussing details where a proposal isn't
        fleshed out.

Disadvantages:

-   The lack of an overview can lead to significant confusion and
    inconsistencies in discussion, hindering fleshing out details.
    -   An overview offers basic shaping of the language as a whole, even as it
        evolves.

The compromise chosen is to have the in-progress design and simply work to
resist both anchoring and distraction stemming from it. We want to get the
benefits we can here while minimizing the cost.

### No overview of designs

The overview will result in content duplication from individual designs. At the
time of this proposal, this may be significant because individual designs are
not fleshed out, and should thus duplication should be expected to reduce over
time. However, it should be expected to remain as the duplication is fundamental
to having an overview.

This duplication could be addressed by removing the overview. Instead,
design/README.md could be restricted to listing existing designs, with no
additional content.

The proposed approach assumes that the proposed overviews offer significant
value for ramp-up.

Advantages:

-   Eliminates content duplication.
-   A simple index is easier to maintain long-term, with less to become stale.
    -   It could be fully automated.

Disadvantages:

-   No quick way to get a high-level understanding.
    -   The overview is the only step before "reading every design".
    -   For example, we summarize common control flow keywords, so that readers
        don't need to identify which documents they come from and what exists.
-   Harder to show relationships between various features.
    -   While examples can show how designs relate, it may not be as obvious
        from a simple link, even when reading the associated design.
    -   For example, lexical conventions come up as references for three
        otherwise distinct sections. If we had a simple index of files, we
        should expect users to need to read individual designs to understand
        relationships.
    -   For example, we explain in brief the relationships between categories of
        types.
    -   There's disagreement about whether the text of README.md offers any
        utility:
        [comment thread](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/83/files/25437de9e61b3a15e8ddde67b6297f1795922355..97da855dbe6023930e02473af46abea03af991e7#r444487049)

## Rationale

This proposal provides some much-needed context for a lot of our discussions and
deliberations about Carbon. Having a skeleton in place for the language design
is an important step forward. We can't make language design decisions in a
vacuum -- we need a "blurry outline" of the big picture before we can start
filling in the details of any particular area. We need to establish a common
frame of reference regarding the overall shape of the language, so that we can
parallelize the in-depth design work.

That means that, by necessity, this proposal suggests lots of concrete design
decisions that have not yet had sufficient analysis for us to affirm them. There
is a shared understanding that we are not committing to any of those decisions,
only to the broad picture painted by the combination of those decisions, and
that all such decisions need to be revisited by another proposal before we
consider them to be agreed on. There is a substantial risk of anchoring how we
think about Carbon -- we’ll just have to do our best to avoid taking this doc as
a given when evaluating subsequent proposals. Those propopsals must justify a
direction that agrees with this doc as much as one that does not agree with it.

This doc sets the stage for increasingly incremental steps towards a complete
design. Establishing a structure for the design is especially helpful as it will
show how things do or do not connect across the language.

Adopting this largely work-in-progress overview in order to see the structure of
things, while still needing to resolve the specifics in each area, will directly
help reinforce our goal of language evolution over time. This will help us learn
how to effectively iterate, and how to compensate and overcome the risks of
anchoring, change aversion, and other challenges.
