# Provisionality

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/0259)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

Every language feature has important dependencies on and interactions with many
other features, and proposals for the design of a feature are going to need to
discuss those dependencies and interactions. During the initial design phases,
it will frequently be the case that those other features don't exist yet, and so
a proposal for feature X will need to sketch out placeholder designs for
features Y and Z in order to discuss how it relates to those features, without
actually proposing them. In some cases, a proposal may consist entirely of such
sketches ([p0083](p0083.md), for example), in order to provide background
context for future concrete proposals.

Similarly, the fact that Carbon is an experiment means that we may sometimes
adopt a design direction even though we don't know whether it will work, because
we need to try it in order to find out whether it will work.

Conversely, although no aspect of Carbon will ever be "final", the purpose of
the design process is to eventually produce a design that the core team and the
community are confident in. As we acquire more confidence in various aspects of
the design, the bar for changing them will get correspondingly higher.

In short, it is expected and healthy that different parts of Carbon proposals
and Carbon's design will be more "provisional" than others. However, this can
lead to several potential problems:

-   Review of a proposal may be derailed by premature discussions of designs
    that it is using as placeholders.
-   Once a proposal is adopted, contributors may assume that the provisional
    aspects of its design have the full confidence of the core team, and try to
    work around their shortcomings rather than surfacing or fixing them.
-   Conversely, contributors may mistakenly think that some aspect of the design
    is a placeholder, when in fact it has already been thoroughly reviewed, and
    be unpleasantly surprised by how much work is required to change it.
-   Designs that were initially understood to be provisional may never be
    revisited, and the results of experimental design choices may never be
    evaluated, resulting in features that become part of the language through
    inertia rather than conscious choice.

For all these reasons, Carbon proposals and the Carbon language design need to
clearly indicate which aspects are intentionally placeholders, experimental, or
otherwise provisional, and we need to have processes in place to ensure that
those aspects are revisited and ratified at the appropriate time.

## Proposal

In order to address the communication problems noted above, I propose a set of
documentation conventions for indicating which aspects of the proposal are
provisional. I further propose using tracking issues to ensure that provisional
designs are revisited appropriately. For specifics on the proposed documentation
conventions, see the changes to CONTRIBUTING.md.

This proposal is mostly additive, but it does change one aspect of how we
currently write proposals. The evolution process currently suggests using the
phrase "open question" to indicate a question that must be resolved prior to
acceptance of the proposal. However, that phrase is commonly used in published
documents to indicate that a question is intentionally not being resolved.
Giving that phrase a different meaning in Carbon documents creates a risk of
confusion, and leaves us without a natural way to identify
intentionally-unresolved questions.

Consequently, I propose using the phrase "question for reviewers" to indicate
questions that must be resolved during proposal review, and using "open
question" for questions that are intentionally left unresolved. This seems
substantially less prone to confusion, and more consistent with existing
conventions for technical writing.
