# `var` statement

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/339)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
    -   [Constants](#constants)
-   [Background](#background)
    -   [Terminology](#terminology)
    -   [Out of scope features](#out-of-scope-features)
    -   [Language comparison](#language-comparison)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
    -   [Executable semantics form](#executable-semantics-form)
-   [Rationale based on Carbon's goals](#rationale-based-on-carbons-goals)
-   [Caveats](#caveats)
    -   [`var` name may change](#var-name-may-change)
        -   [Changing to `let mut`](#changing-to-let-mut)
    -   [Multiple identifiers in one statement](#multiple-identifiers-in-one-statement)
    -   [Update provisional pattern matching syntax](#update-provisional-pattern-matching-syntax)
    -   [Update provisional `$` syntax](#update-provisional--syntax)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [No `var` introducer keyword](#no-var-introducer-keyword)
    -   [Name of the `var` statement introducer](#name-of-the-var-statement-introducer)
    -   [Colon between type and identifier](#colon-between-type-and-identifier)
        -   [Syntax ambiguity](#syntax-ambiguity)
        -   [Confusion with other languages and alternatives](#confusion-with-other-languages-and-alternatives)
        -   [Use in pattern matching](#use-in-pattern-matching)
        -   [Advantages and disadvantages](#advantages-and-disadvantages)
        -   [Conclusion](#conclusion)
    -   [Type after identifier](#type-after-identifier)
        -   [Ordering as a way to quickly answer questions](#ordering-as-a-way-to-quickly-answer-questions)
        -   [Syntax popularity](#syntax-popularity)
    -   [Type elision](#type-elision)
        -   [Advantages and disadvantages](#advantages-and-disadvantages-1)
        -   [Conclusion](#conclusion-1)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

The `var` statement is noted in the
[language overview](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/tree/trunk/docs/design#ifelse),
but is provisional — no justification has been provided. Variable declarations
are fundamental, and it should be clear to what degree the current syntax is
adopted.

It's expected that after the adoption of this proposal, `var` syntax will still
not be finalized: the [proposal](#proposal) is an experiment.

### Constants

Although constants are naturally related to variables, this proposal does not
include any syntax for constants. This is expected to be revisited later.

## Background

### Terminology

In this proposal, "variable" is defined as an identifier referring to a mutable
value.

### Out of scope features

Questions have come up about:

-   The type system
-   Type checking
-   Scoping

All of these are important features. However, in the interest of small
proposals, they are out of scope of this proposal.

### Language comparison

Variables are standard in many languages. Some various forms to consider are:

-   C++:

    ```cc
    int x;
    int y = 0;
    bool a = true, *b = nullptr, c;
    ```

-   Python:

    ```python
    x = None
    y = 0
    z: int = 7  # Added by PEP 526.
    ```

-   Swift:

    ```swift
    var x = 0
    var y: Int = 0
    var z: Int
    ```

-   TypeScript

    ```ts
    let y: Number = 0;
    var x = 0;  # Legacy from JavaScript.
    ```

-   Rust

    ```rust
    let mut x = 0;
    let mut y: i32 = 0;
    let mut z: i32;
    ```

-   Go

    ```go
    var x = 0
    y := 0
    var z int
    var a, b = true, false
    ```

-   Visual Basic

    ```vb
    Dim x As Integer = 3
    ```

## Proposal

Carbon should adopt `var <type> <identifier> [ = <value> ];` syntax for variable
statements.

Considerations for this syntax are:

-   **Type and identifier ordering:** The ordering of `<type>` before
    `<identifier>` reflects the typical C++ ordering syntax.
    -   Some C++ syntax can put type information after the identifier, such as
        `int x[6];`. Carbon should be expected to place that as part of the
        type.
-   **`var` introducer keyword:** The use of `var` makes it clearer for readers
    to skim and see where variables are being declared. It also reduces
    complexity and potential ambiguity in language parsing.
-   **One variable:** In C++, multiple variables can be declared in a single
    statement. An equivalent Carbon syntax may end up looking like
    `var (Int x, String y) = (0, "foo");`, so limiting to one declaration is not
    fundamentally restrictive. However, by breaking with C++ and requiring the
    full type to be specified with each identifier, we achieve two important
    things:
    -   It's clear what the full type is, preventing difficult-to-read
        statements with a mix of stack variables, pointers, and similar.
    -   As the language grows, a function returning a tuple may be assigned to
        distinctly named and typed variables.

**Experiment:** The ordering of type and identifier will be researched. For more
information, see the [alternative](#type-after-identifier).

### Executable semantics form

Example bison syntax for executable semantics is:

```bison
statement:
  "var" expression identifier optional_assignment;
| /* preexisting statements elided */
;

optional_assignment:
  /* empty */
| "=" expression
;
```

## Rationale based on Carbon's goals

Carbon needs variables in order to be writable by developers. That functionality
needs a syntax.

Relevant goals are:

-   [3. Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write):

    -   Adding a keyword makes it easy for developers to visually identify
        functions.

-   [5. Fast and scalable development](/docs/project/goals.md#fast-and-scalable-development):

    -   The addition of a keyword should make parsing easy.

-   [7. Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code):

    -   Keeping syntax close to C++ will make it easier for developers to
        transition.

## Caveats

### `var` name may change

The name `var` could still change. However, it's used with similar meaning in
other languages including Swift, Go, and TypeScript, and so it's reasonable to
expect it will not.

#### Changing to `let mut`

The idea that `var` may change includes the possibility that `var` may become
something like `let mut` in Rust. However, this is not assumed by this proposal:

-   This proposal [omits constant syntax](#constants).
-   It would need to be considered whether the syntax tax of `let mut`
    appropriately
    [focuses on encouraging appropriate usage of features rather than restricting misuse](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)).
-   Lower verbosity syntax for variables is more
    [consistent with C++](p0285.md#c-as-baseline), even if constants are made
    less verbose by way of `let`.

### Multiple identifiers in one statement

Although `var (Int x, String y) = (0, "foo");` syntax is mentioned, this
proposal is not intended to propose such a syntax. It's noted primarily to
explain the likely path, that this does not _rule out_ abbreviated syntax such
as that. That should probably be covered as part of tuples.

### Update provisional pattern matching syntax

Pattern matching syntax in [the overview](/docs/design/README.md) uses syntax
similar to `Int: x`. As part of removing the
[colon between type and identifier](#colon-between-type-and-identifier) from the
provisional `var` syntax, that syntax should be changed to remove the `:`.
Details should be resolved as part of the eventual pattern matching proposal,
but if changes are needed to add a separator, the `var` syntax should be updated
to remain consistent. The precise form of that implementation will be part of
normal Carbon evolution.

For example, replacing `fn Sum(Int: a, Int: b) -> Int;` with
`fn Sum(Int a, Int b) -> Int;` and
`case (Int: p, (Float: x, Float: _)) if (p < 13) => {` with
`case (Int p, (Float x, Float _)) if (p < 13) => {`.

### Update provisional `$` syntax

Variables using `Type:$` and similar should drop the `:`, as in `Type$`.

## Alternatives considered

Noted alternatives are key differences from C++ variable declaration syntax.

### No `var` introducer keyword

The intent of the `var` statement is to improve readability and parsability, and
it's related to `fn` for functions. Although code is more succinct without
introducers, the noted benefits are expected to be significant. Most other
modern languages use similar introducers, and so this break from C++ is adopting
a different norm.

### Name of the `var` statement introducer

`var` is used with a similar meaning in several other languages, including
Swift, Go, and JavaScript. `let` is used by TypeScript. `let mut` is used by
Rust, with `let` used for constants (this use of `let` alone is consistent with
other languages). In general `var` appears to be a more common choice.

### Colon between type and identifier

The use of a colon (`:`) between the type and identifier is intended to reduce
potential parsing ambiguity, and to make reading code easier. As proposed, there
is no colon between the type and identifier.

#### Syntax ambiguity

Using a colon or other separator could make it easier to avoid certain kinds of
ambiguities. For example, suppose we decided to use a postfix `*` operator to
form pointer types, as in C++. In such a setup, we could have code like the
following:

```carbon
var T * x = 3;
var T * x = 3 y;
```

In the first statement, `*` is a unary operator and so `T*` is the type and `x`
is the identifier. However, in the second statement, `*` is a binary operator
and so `T * x = 3` is the type, and `y` is the identifier; the resulting
compiler errors may be confusing to users. Furthermore, the place of `3` could
be taken by an an arbitrarily complex expression; this could cause resolving the
ambiguity between unary and binary `*` to require unbounded look-ahead,
adversely impacting
[code compilation time goals](/docs/project/goals.md#fast-and-scalable-development).

Consider instead the code:

```carbon
var T *: x = 3;
var T * x = 3: y;
```

The colon makes it unambiguous whether the `*` in each case is unary or binary
with only one token of look-ahead. More importantly, this syntax immediately
calls the reader's attention to the fact that the second declaration has a
highly unusual type.

There are other ways of resolving ambiguities like this. For example, we could
avoid allowing the same operator to have both postfix and infix forms, or we
could distinguish them by the presence or absence of whitespace. However, even
if we avoid _formal_ ambiguity by such means, a separator like `:` may be useful
for reducing _visual_ ambiguity for human readers.

#### Confusion with other languages and alternatives

One of the disadvantages of `:` is that with `var Int: x`, ordering is
inconsistent with other languages using `:`, such as Rust and Swift, which would
say `var x: Int`.

It may be worth considering other syntax options. A few to consider are:

```carbon
var(Int) x;
var Int# x;
var Int @x;
var Int -> x;
```

These aren't part of the proposed syntax mainly because it's not clear any would
gain as much support as `:`. However, this is an opportunity to make suggestions
and see if there's a good compromise.

#### Use in pattern matching

The
[old draft pattern matching proposal](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/87)
used `:` as a separator. In pattern matching, the `:` may be particularly
important to distinguish between value matching and type name matching. However,
the pattern matching proposal should examine these choices and alternatives
before we reach a conclusion that `:` is necessary for pattern matching. Per
[syntax ambiguity](#syntax-ambiguity), it is expected that `:` has some
advantages, but may not turn out to make a compiler difference due to prevailing
constraints on type expression syntax.

This proposal suggests we
[update provisional pattern matching syntax](#update-provisional-pattern-matching-syntax)
to match the proposed `var` syntax.

#### Advantages and disadvantages

Advantages:

-   Reduces syntax ambiguity.
    -   This should improve readability and parsability.
    -   It should make it easier to debug issues during development.

Disadvantages:

-   Deviates from the common syntax used by most languages with the type before
    the identifier, including C, C++, Java, and C#.
    -   Changing from C++ is especially significant because of Carbon's goals
        for interoperability and migration which will mean an especially large
        portion of Carbon developers will be actively reading both Carbon and
        C++ code.
-   Other notable languages that us `:` in variable statements, including Swift,
    put the type after the identifier.
    -   It may be worth considering
        [alternatives to `:`](#confusion-with-other-languages-and-alternatives).
    -   If the alternative of [type after identifier](#type-after-identifier) is
        adopted, it's likely a `:` separator will be adopted.

#### Conclusion

Right now the proposal is to not have anything between the type and identifier
in order to avoid cross-language ambiguity, and to retain syntax that is closer
to C++. However, the ultimate decision may hinge on type and identifier
ordering, as well as related future evolution.

### Type after identifier

There are many languages that put the type after the identifier. A common format
used by Swift and Rust is `var x: Int`.

It's worth considering the sentence-like readings:

-   `var x Int` (or `var x: Int`) may be read as "declare x as an int" or "make
    a variable x and give it int storage".
-   `var Int x` may be read as "declare an int called x" or "make a variable
    with int storage called x".

These readings might be of similar quality, and are presented to offer different
perspectives on how to read the possible statement orderings.

#### Ordering as a way to quickly answer questions

Ordering is essentially a question of pairing identifiers and types. This can be
cast as asking which question developers consider more important when reading
code:

1. What is the type of variable `x`?
2. What is the identifier of the `Int` variable?

We assert the first question is the more important one: developers will see an
identifier in later code, and want to know its type. However, how do we
determine which order is better for this purpose?

Unfortunately, little research has been done on this. All we're aware of right
now is a study from an unpublished undergraduate project from Germany. The study
was done in Java with 50 students. Its data indicates that it's faster to answer
question 1 if the type comes first, and faster to answer question 2 if the
identifier comes first. We do not want to make decisions based on the study
because it isn't published, studied a small group, and doesn't directly compare
possible `var` syntaxes; however, it still influences our thoughts.

#### Syntax popularity

When considering what to use for now, we can consider the popularity of various
languages. The top 10 on several sources (with percentages noted by sources that
have them) are:

| TIOBE        | Pct | GitHut     | Pct | PYPL        | Pct | Octoverse  |
| ------------ | --: | ---------- | --: | ----------- | --: | ---------- |
| C            | 16% | JavaScript | 19% | Python      | 30% | JavaScript |
| Java         | 11% | Python     | 16% | Java        | 17% | Python     |
| Python       | 11% | Java       | 11% | JavaScript  |  8% | Java       |
| C++          |  7% | Go         |  8% | C#          |  7% | TypeScript |
| C#           |  4% | C++        |  7% | C and C++   |  7% | C#         |
| Visual Basic |  4% | Ruby       |  7% | PHP         |  6% | PHP        |
| JavaScript   |  2% | TypeScript |  7% | R           |  4% | C++        |
| PHP          |  2% | PHP        |  6% | Objective-C |  4% | C          |
| SQL          |  2% | C#         |  4% | Swift       |  2% | Shell      |
| Assembly     |  2% | C          |  3% | TypeScript  |  2% | Ruby       |

Sources:

-   [TIOBE](https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/) as of 2021-02
-   [GitHut](https://madnight.github.io/githut/) as of 2020 Q4
-   [PYPL](https://pypl.github.io/PYPL.html) as of 2021-02
-   [Octoverse](https://octoverse.github.com/) as of 2020-10

For these languages:

-   C, C++, C#, Objective-C, and Java put the identifier after the type.
    -   These use `<type> <identifier>`, with no keyword.
-   Python, Go, TypeScript, Visual Basic, SQL, and Swift put the type after the
    identifier.
    -   Python uses `<identifier>: <type>`, with no keyword. This was added in
        [Python 3.6](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0526/), and reflects
        language evolution.
    -   Go uses `var <identifier> <type>`, with no colon.
    -   TypeScript and Swift use `var <identifier>: <type>`.
    -   Visual Basic uses `Dim <identifier> as <type>`.
    -   SQL uses `DECLARE @<identifier> AS <type>`, where `AS` is optional.
-   JavaScript, R, Ruby, PHP, Shell, and Assembly language do not specify types
    in the same ways as other languages.

### Type elision

First, with Carbon it's been discussed to require use of `auto` (or a similar
explicit syntax marker) instead of allowing developers to elide the type
entirely from a `var` statement. In other words, while `var Int x = 0;` is
valid, and `var auto x = 0;` is equivalent, there is no form such as
`var x = 0;` which removes the type entirely.

Most languages that write `var x: Int` also allow eliding the type when
assigning a value. For example, Go allows `x := 0` and Swift allows
`var x = 0;`. As a result, there is no need for an `auto` keyword.

This would be more surprising with `var Int x` syntax because removing the `Int`
now places the identifier immediately after `var`, where the type normally is.
This may be subtly confusing to developers. However, if `auto` is required for
explicitness, the issue is moot.

Retaining `auto` does not eliminate the need to consider type elision as part of
advantages and disadvantages: if the type is put after the identifier and
`var x: auto` syntax is used, it now becomes an inconsistency with other
languages. This inconsistency would be a Carbon innovation that may confuse
developers, leading to long-term pressure to remove `auto` for consistency with
similar languages, and thus a disadvantage.

#### Advantages and disadvantages

Advantages:

-   Consistent with languages that put a `:` in the type declaration.
    -   Notable languages using `x: Int` syntax include Swift, Rust, Kotlin and
        TypeScript. Go is similar but does not include `:`.
    -   Swift puts
        [argument labels](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/Functions.html#ID166)
        before variable declaration. Keeping the identifier first allows
        consistency with Swift's argument label syntax while also keeping names
        adjacent.
-   More opportunity to unify a concept of putting the identifier immediately
    after the keyword.
    -   `fn`, `import`, and `package` will all have the identifier immediately
        after the keyword, with non-identifier content following.
        -   It's expected that a typical function declaration will look like
            `fn Foo(Int bar)`, with `var` only added when a storage for a copy
            is _required_. Thus, this advantage is primarily about the function
            identifier `Foo`, not parameter identifiers.
    -   Other cases, such as `alias`, are likely flexible and could follow `var`
        in concept by putting the resulting name at the end. That is,
        `alias To = From;` for consistency with `var x: Int;` versus
        `alias From as To;` similar to `var Int x;` ordering.

Disadvantages:

-   If Carbon doesn't support [type elision](#type-elision), it creates an
    inconsistency with other notable languages using `x: Int` syntax.
    -   It may be worth considering
        [alternatives to `:`](#confusion-with-other-languages-and-alternatives).
-   The ordering of `x: Int` is inconsistent with C++ variable syntax.
    -   Negatively affects
        [Familiarity for experienced C++ developers with a gentle learning curve](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code).
    -   It is consistent with other parts of C++ syntax, particularly
        `using To = From;`, although not `typedef From To;`.
-   Early signs are that putting the identifier first makes it slower for
    developers to answer the question, "what is the type of variable `x`?"
    -   This indicates worse readability in spite of the sentence ordering, the
        essential part of
        [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write).
-   Popular languages tend to use `int x` syntax, including C, Java, C++, and
    C#. Other notable languages include Groovy and Dart.

#### Conclusion

We should conduct a larger study on the topic of type and identifier ordering
and syntax. Until then, we should adopt C++-like syntax. This meets the
migration sub-goal

[Familiarity for experienced C++ developers with a gentle learning curve](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code),
and allows applying the higher-priority goal
[Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
if supporting evidence is found.

**Experiment**: The ordering of type and identifier will be researched.
