# GitHub Discussions

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/444)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Keep using Discourse Forums](#keep-using-discourse-forums)
    -   [Try to maintain history](#try-to-maintain-history)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

Right now we run our own [Discourse Forums](https://forums.carbon-lang.dev/).
[GitHub Discussions](https://docs.github.com/en/discussions) was recently
released, and should be evaluated for appropriateness as a replacement.

## Background

[GitHub Discussions](https://docs.github.com/en/discussions) is a new forum
solution offered by GitHub. Although it was initially only for public
repositories, as of March, it is
[available to private repositories](https://github.blog/2021-03-09-github-discussions-now-available-for-private-repositories/).

Developers can
[preview in carbon-lang](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/discussions).

[Discourse Forums](https://forums.carbon-lang.dev/) are currently used by
Carbon. These run on a Google Cloud instance and are mostly maintained by
JonMeow.

## Proposal

We should shut down the Discourse Forums and adapt GitHub Discussions to our
needs. GitHub Discussions categories and documentation should be updated
accordingly, alongside evolution process changes.

Discourse Forums should be frozen and eventually shut down once we are confident
in the switch. History can be discarded.

## Alternatives considered

### Keep using Discourse Forums

Advantages:

-   Discourse Forums has categories and subcategories.
    -   GitHub Discussions only has categories.
-   Discourse Forums has controllable settings for many things.
    -   It can be branded.
    -   We can set various options for posting and editing.
-   Keeps existing history.

Disadvantages:

-   Discourse Forums is a now unnecessary split in communication mechanisms.
    -   We already use GitHub for issues and PR discussion.
    -   Stopping use of GitHub is infeasible.
    -   We currently maintain groups
-   Discourse Forums requires significant maintenance:
    -   Email is partially set up,
        [but not fully](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/356).
    -   Software updates need to be manually applied, and have involved
        reinstalling the Google Cloud instance from scratch.
    -   The Google Cloud instance that it runs on requires routine maintenance
        due to changes to internal Google policy.
    -   We've occasionally had settings get in the way of work, which requires
        investigation to figure out what setting is wrong.
    -   Googlers periodically find links to the forums and apply for access,
        which I routinely respond to and reject.
-   We will be handing more control over to GitHub.
    -   For example, GitHub presumably has spam settings, which we won't.
    -   Discourse Forums has things we can't control too.
        -   For example, it has nuisance warning about duplicates and messaging
            groups which require click-throughs. I've looked and don't think
            these can be disabled.

### Try to maintain history

We've deliberately not put much into Discourse Forums, and GitHub issues are
already a focus of discussion. There's not enough history to justify significant
investment into making a copy.
