# Principle: Write Building Codes, Not Style Guides

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/546)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Background](#background)
-   [Principle](#principle)
-   [Applications of these principles](#applications-of-these-principles)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Background

Most languages come with a set of rules around naming, use of whitespace,
character sets, and the like. These are enforced by the compiler and other
tools. Some of these rules are for ease of parsing or compiling, while others
are to ensure the code is readable and maintainable. In addition, most languages
grow an ecosystem of style guides that recommend various best practices around
naming, whitespace, character sets, length of names, length of functions, and so
on. These guides compete for followers and adherents. For a new language, there
is pressure to include more rules in the language, so as to need less of them in
the guides, and to have more consistency.

## Principle

The principle here relies on an analogy: in creating a house, you might well
consult any number of style guides for advice on what colour to paint things,
whether all the bedroms should be on the same floor, or what size a balcony
needs to be before anyone actually uses it. But your house must conform to a
number of building codes as well: rules about the spacing of the stair railings,
the thickness of support beams, and the presence of windows in bedrooms for
emergency exit. These are safety rules, not a matter of taste.

Carbon should have a building code. These are enforced rules designed to prevent
bugs and exploits. Carbon doesn't need a style guide and can't really choose
among various competing preferences for tabstops, naming conventions, or whether
or not comments need to be full sentences.

## Applications of these principles

Carbon could insist that local variable names use a particular casing
convention, that lines be a maximum length, or that a particular indentation
strategy be followed. If the motivation for such a rule is "I think it will make
the code easier to read" that is a style guide, and we should not encode it into
the language. Compare those to a rule such as "braces are not optional for if
and while constructs." If the motivation for that rule is to prevent
`GOTO FAIL`, it is more of a building code rule than a style guide rule.

Ideally we would encode no style guides at all, and our building code would be
rock solid, preventing all the kinds of bugs a language can prevent through
language design (leaving plenty of room for bugs a language can't prevent.)
