# Comparison operators

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/702)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
    -   [Terminology](#terminology)
    -   [Usage in existing languages](#usage-in-existing-languages)
    -   [Three-way comparisons](#three-way-comparisons)
    -   [Chained comparisons](#chained-comparisons)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
    -   [Precedence](#precedence)
    -   [Associativity](#associativity)
    -   [Built-in comparisons and implicit conversions](#built-in-comparisons-and-implicit-conversions)
        -   [Consistency with implicit conversions](#consistency-with-implicit-conversions)
        -   [Comparisons with constants](#comparisons-with-constants)
        -   [Performance](#performance)
    -   [Overloading](#overloading)
    -   [Default implementations for basic types](#default-implementations-for-basic-types)
-   [Rationale based on Carbon's goals](#rationale-based-on-carbons-goals)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Alternative symbols](#alternative-symbols)
    -   [Chained comparisons](#chained-comparisons-1)
    -   [Convert operands like C++](#convert-operands-like-c)
    -   [Provide a three-way comparison operator](#provide-a-three-way-comparison-operator)
    -   [Allow comparisons as the operand of `not`](#allow-comparisons-as-the-operand-of-not)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

We need to be able to compare values for equality, and to compare ordered values
for relative ordering.

## Background

### Terminology

We refer to tests that check whether two values are the same or different as
_equality_ comparisons, and to tests that determine the relative ordering of two
values as _relational_ comparisons.

### Usage in existing languages

There is near-universal convention on the use of the following symbols for
relational operators:

-   `<`, `<=`, `>`, and `>=` perform ordered comparisons (less than, less than
    or equal to, greater than, greater than or equal to).

There are rare exceptions in somewhat esoteric languages: some languages use `≤`
and `≥`, but these are not straightforward to type for many potential Carbon
developers.

For equality operators, there is some divergence but still a very strong trend:

-   C-family languages, Rust, Swift, Kotlin, Zig, Nim, Ruby, etc. use `==` for
    equality comparison and `!=` for inequality comparison.
-   Some languages, such as ALGOL, APL, BASIC, and PL/I, use `=` as equality
    comparison, with some using a different symbol (such as `:=` or `<-`) for
    assignment and others distinguishing assignment from equality comparison
    based on context.
-   Haskell and Fortran use `==` for "equal to" and `/=` for "not equal to". The
    latter is intended to resemble a ≠ symbol.
-   Some languages, such as Pascal and BASIC, use `<>` for inequality
    comparison. Python 2 permits this as a synonym for `!=`.
-   Perl uses `eq` and `ne` for string comparisons; some shells and UNIX `test`
    use `-eq` and `-ne` for for integer comparisons.

Some languages support multiple different kinds of equality comparison, such as
both a value comparison (typically `==`) and an object identity comparison
(typically `===` or `is`). Some languages that freely convert between numbers
and strings have different operators to perform a string comparison versus a
numeric comparison. Fortran has custom `.eqv.` and `.neqv.` for equality
comparisons of Boolean values.

Some languages have synonyms for equality operators. For example, Fortran allows
`.eq.`, `.ne.`, `.gt.`, and so on, as synonyms for `==`, `/=`, `>`, and so on.
This appears to be historical: FORTRAN 77 had only the dotted forms of these
operators.

### Three-way comparisons

C++ has three-way comparisons, written using the `<=>` operator. These provide a
useful mechanism to allow overloading the behavior of relational comparisons
without defining four separate operator overloads for relational comparisons.

Similarly, Python provides a `__cmp__` special method that can be used to
implement all equality and relational comparisons.

### Chained comparisons

Python permits comparisons to be chained: that is, `a < b <= c` is interpreted
as `a < b and b <= c`, except that `b` is evaluated only once. In most C-family
languages, that expression is instead interpreted as `(a < b) <= c`, which
computes the value of `a < b`, maps `false` to `0` and `true` to `1`, then
compares the result to `c`.

## Proposal

Carbon will provide the following operators:

-   Equality comparison operators: `==` and `!=`.
-   Relational comparison operators: `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`.

Each has the obvious mathematical meaning, where `==` means =, `!=` means ≠,
`<=` means ≤, and `>=` means ≥.

There will be no three-way comparison operator symbol. The interface used to
support overloading comparison operators will provide a named function to
perform three-way comparisons.

Chained comparisons are an error: a comparison expression cannot appear as an
unparenthesized operand of another comparison operator.

For built-in types, we will follow these rules:

-   Behave consistently with implicit conversions: if an operation is valid
    between built-in types `T` and `U`, then it is valid between built-in types
    that implicitly convert to `T` and `U`.
-   Never invent an intermediate type that is larger than both operand types.
-   A comparison produces either a mathematically correct answer or a
    compilation error.

The first two rules are expected to also apply for other built-in operators,
such as arithmetic. The third rule is specific to comparisons.

One consequence of the first rule is that we do not convert operands in a way
that might lose information. This is generally also implied by the third rule.

## Details

All six operators are infix binary operators. For standard Carbon types, they
produce a `Bool` value.

### Precedence

The comparison operators are all at the same precedence level. This level is
lower than operators used to compute (non-Boolean) values, higher than the
logical operators `and` and `or`, and incomparable with the precedence of `not`.

For example, this is OK:

```
if (n + m * 3 < n * n and 3 < m and m < 6) {}
```

... but these are errors:

```
// Error, ambiguous: `(not a) == b` or `not (a == b)`?
if (not a == b) {}
// Error, requires parentheses: `a == (not b)`.
if (a == not b) {}
// Error, requires parentheses: `not (f < 5.0)`.
if (not f < 5.0) {}
```

### Associativity

The comparison operators are non-associative. For example:

```
// Error, need `3 < m and m < 6`.
if (3 < m < 6) {}
// Error, need `a == b and b == c`.
if (a == b == c) {}
// Error, need `(m > 1) == (n > 1)`.
if (m > 1 == n > 1) {}
```

### Built-in comparisons and implicit conversions

Built-in comparisons are permitted:

-   when both operands are of standard Carbon integer types (`Int(n)` or
    `Unsigned(n)`), or
-   when both operands are of standard Carbon floating-point types (`Float(n)`),
    or
-   when one operand is of floating-point type and the other is of integer type,
    if all values of the integer type can be exactly represented in the
    floating-point type

In each case, the result is the mathematically-correct answer. This applies even
when comparing `Int(n)` with `Unsigned(m)`.

For example:

```
// The value of `v` is True, because `a` is less than `b`, even though the
// result of either an `i32` comparison or a `u32` comparison would be False.
fn f(a: i32, b: u32) -> Bool { return a < b; }
let v: Bool = f(-1, 4_000_000_000);

// This does not compile, because `i64` values in general (and 10^18 in
// particular) are not exactly representable in the type `f32`.
let f: f32 = 1.0e18;
let n: i64 = 1_000_000_000_000_000_000;
let w: Bool = f == n;
```

Comparisons involving integer and floating-point constants are not covered by
these rules and are [discussed separately](#comparisons-with-constants).

#### Consistency with implicit conversions

As specified in [#820](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/820),
we support the following implicit conversions:

-   from `Int(n)` to `Int(m)` if `m > n`,
-   from `Unsigned(n)` to `Int(m)` or `Unsigned(m)` if `m > n`,
-   from `Float(n)` to `Float(m)` if `m > n`, and
-   from `Int(n)` to `Float(m)` if `Float(m)` can represent all values of
    `Int(n)`.

These rules can be summarized as: a type `T` can be converted to `U` if every
value of type `T` is a value of type `U`.

Additionally [#820](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/820)
permits conversions from certain kinds of integer and floating-point constants
to `Int(n)` and `Float(n)` types if the constant can be represented in the type.

All built-in comparisons can be viewed as performing implicit conversions on at
most one of the operands in order to reach a suitable pair of identical or very
similar types, and then performing a comparison on those types. The target types
for these implicit conversions are, for each suitable value `n`:

-   `Int(n)` vs `Int(n)`
-   `Unsigned(n)` vs `Unsigned(n)`
-   `Int(n)` vs `Unsigned(n)`
-   `Unsigned(n)` vs `Int(n)`
-   `Float(n)` vs `Float(n)`

There will in general be multiple combinations of implicit conversions that will
lead to one of the above forms, but we will arrive at the same result regardless
of which is selected, because all comparisons are mathematically correct and all
implicit conversions are lossless. Implementations are expected to do whatever
is most efficient: for example, for `u16 < i32` it is likely that the best
choice would be to promote the `u16` to `i32`, not `u32`.

Because we only ever convert at most one operand, we never use an intermediate
type that is larger than both input types. For example, both `i32` and `f32` can
be implicitly converted to `f64`, but we do not permit comparisons between `i32`
and `f32` even though we could perform those comparisons in `f64`. If such
comparisons were permitted, the results could be surprising:

```
// OK, i32 can exactly represent this value.
var n: i32 = 2_000_000_001;
// OK, this value is within the representable range for f32.
var f: f32 = 2_000_000_001.0;
// This comparison could compare unequal, because f32 cannot exactly represent
// the value 2,000,000,001.
if (n == f) { ... }
// OK with explicit cast, but may still compare unequal.
if (n == f as f64) { ... }
if (n as f64 == f) { ... }
```

The two kinds of mixed-type comparison may be [less efficient](#performance)
than the other kinds due to the slightly wider domain.

Note that this approach diverges from C++, which would convert both operands to
a common type first, sometimes performing a lossy conversion potentially giving
an incorrect result, sometimes converting both operands, and sometimes using a
wider type than either of the operand types.

#### Comparisons with constants

As described in [#820](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/820),
integer constants can be implicitly converted to any integer or floating-point
type that can represent their value, and floating-point constants can be
implicitly converted to any floating-point type that can represent their value.
We permit the following comparisons involving constants:

-   A constant can be compared with a value of any type to which it can be
    implicitly converted.
-   Any two constants can be compared, even if there is no type that can
    represent both.

Note that this disallows comparisons between, for example, `i32` and an integer
literal that cannot be represented in `i32`. Such comparisons would always be
tautological. This decision should be revisited if it proves problematic in
practice, for example in templated code where the literal is sometimes in range.

#### Performance

The choice to give correct results for signed/unsigned comparisons has a
performance impact in practice, because it exposes operations that some
processors do not currently directly support.
[Sample microbenchmarks](https://quick-bench.com/q/1_xA8G_jXci_yeOKt0WgCc6eGN4)
for implementations of several operations show the following performance on
x86_64:

| Operation   | Mathematical comparison time | C++ comparison time | Ratio |
| ----------- | ---------------------------- | ------------------- | ----- |
| `i64 < u64` | 1636                         | 798                 | 2.0x  |
| `u64 < i64` | 1956                         | 798                 | 2.5x  |

The execution times here are computed as operation time minus no-op time.

The mixed-type operations typically have 2-2.5x the execution time of the
same-type operations. However, this is a predictable performance change, and can
be controlled by the developer by converting the operands to a suitable type
prior to the conversion if a faster same-type comparison is preferred over a
correct mixed-type comparison.

The above comparison attempts to demonstrate a worst-case difference. In many
cases, better code can be generated for the mixed-type comparison. For example,
when
[branching on the result of the comparison](https://quick-bench.com/q/mXJiHK3_RcCH4fgB88phQscLu88),
the difference is significantly reduced:

| Operation   | Mathematical comparison time | C++ comparison time | Ratio |
| ----------- | ---------------------------- | ------------------- | ----- |
| `i64 < u64` | 996                          | 991                 | 1.0x  |
| `u64 < i64` | 1973                         | 997                 | 2.0x  |

### Overloading

Separate interfaces will be provided to permit overloading equality and
relational comparisons. The exact design of those interfaces is left to a future
proposal. As non-binding design guidance for such a proposal:

-   The interface for equality comparisons should primarily provide the ability
    to override the behavior of `==`. The `!=` operator can optionally also be
    overridden, with a default implementation that returns `not (a == b)`.
    Overriding `!=` separately from `==` is expected to be used to support
    floating-point NaN comparisons and for C++ interoperability.
-   The interface for relational comparisons should primarily provide the
    ability to specify a three-way comparison operator. The individual
    relational comparison operators can optionally be overridden separately,
    with a default implementation in terms of the three-way comparison operator.
    This facility is expected to be used primarily to support C++
    interoperability.
-   Overloaded comparison operators may wish to produce a type other than
    `Bool`, for uses such as a vector comparison producing a vector of `Bool`
    values. We should decide whether we wish to support such uses.

### Default implementations for basic types

In addition to being defined for standard Carbon numeric types, equality and
relational comparisons are also defined for all "data" types:

-   Tuples.
-   Structs (structural data classes).
-   Classes implementing an interface that identifies them as data classes.

Relational comparisons for these types provide a lexicographical ordering. This
proposal defers to
[#710](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/710) for details on
comparison support for classes.

In each case, the comparison is only available if it is supported by all element
types.

The `Bool` type should be treated as a choice type, and so should support
equality comparisons and relational comparisons if and only if choice types do
in general. That decision is left to a future proposal.

## Rationale based on Carbon's goals

-   _Performance-critical software:_

    -   The use of a three-way comparison as the central primitive for
        overloading relational comparisons provides predictable, composable
        performance for comparing hierarchical data structures.
    -   The performance of mixed comparisons may be slower than in C++, but this
        is because it's performing a different operation. This performance
        change is predictable, and can be controlled by the programmer by
        performing suitable non-value-preserving casts to a common type prior to
        the comparison.

-   _Code that is easy to read, understand, and write:_

    -   The chosen precedence and associativity rules aim to avoid bugs and
        ensure the code does what it appears to do, requiring parentheses in
        cases where the intent is unclear.
    -   The choice to not perform lossy conversions on operands of a comparison
        operator removes a source of bugs caused by unintended lossy
        conversions.

-   _Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code:_

    -   The use of the chosen operator symbols exactly matches C++, reducing
        friction for developers and code moving between the two languages, and
        for interoperability.

## Alternatives considered

### Alternative symbols

We could use `/=` instead of `!=` for not-equal comparisons.

Advantages:

-   Avoids overloading `!` for both "not equals" and template/generic use in
    `:!` bindings.
-   There is no other usage of `!` meaning "not" in the language because we use
    a `not` operator.

Disadvantages:

-   Unfamiliar to C++ programmers.
-   `a /= b` would likely be expected to mean an `a = a / b` compound
    assignment.
-   Breaks consistency with Python, which uses `not` for logical negation and
    `!=` for inequality comparison.

We could use `=/=` instead of `!=` for not-equal comparisons.

Advantages:

-   As above; also `=/=` looks like an `==` with a line through the middle.

Disadvantages:

-   This would be inventive and unlike all other languages. As above, breaks
    consistency with Python.
-   This would make `=/=` one character longer, and harder to type on US-ASCII
    keyboards because the keys are distant but likely to be typed with the same
    finger.

### Chained comparisons

We could support Python-like chained comparisons.

Advantages:

-   Small ergonomic improvement for range comparisons.
-   Middle operand is evaluated only once.

Disadvantages:

-   Using the middle expression as an argument to two different functions may
    create problems, as the value will need to be stored somewhere, potentially
    changing the semantics of the operator expression as we can no longer move
    from the operand.
-   Both short-circuiting behavior and non-short-circuiting behavior will be
    surprising and unintuitive to some. The short-circiuting option will
    introduce control flow without a keyword to announce it, which goes against
    our design decision to use a keyword for `and` and `or` to announce the
    control flow. The non-short-circuiting option will evaluate subexpressions
    unnecessarily, which creates a tension with our performance goal.
-   Experienced C++ developers may expect a different behavior, such as
    `a < b == cmp` comparing the result of `a < b` against the Boolean value
    `cmp`.

See also the ongoing discussion in
[#451](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/451).

### Convert operands like C++

We could convert the operands of comparison operators in a way that's equivalent
to C++'s behavior.

Advantages:

-   May ease migration from C++.
-   May allow programmers to reuse some intuition, for example when comparing
    floating-point values against integer values.
-   Allows more efficient machine code to be generated for source code that
    takes no special care about the types of comparison operands.
-   Improves performance predictability for C++ developers unfamiliar with
    Carbon's rules.

Disadvantages:

-   Produces incorrect results.
-   Does not provide a simple syntax for correct mixed-type comparisons.

### Provide a three-way comparison operator

We could provide a symbol for three-way comparisons, such as C++20's `<=>`.

Advantages:

-   The use of a symbol rather than a named member of an interface for this
    functionality may ease migration from C++20.

Disadvantages:

-   Reserves a symbol for an operation that should not be used directly except
    in special circumstances, and that will produce a nuanced type even when
    comparing standard Carbon types such as `f32`.

### Allow comparisons as the operand of `not`

We could permit comparisons to appear as the immediate operand of `not` without
parentheses.

Advantages:

-   Provides an easier syntax for floating-point comparisons where the desired
    result for a NaN operand is `True` rather than `False`: `not f < 5.0`.

Disadvantages:

-   Introduces ambiguity when comparing Boolean values: `not cond1 == cond2`
    might intend to compare `not cond1` to `cond2` rather than comparing
    `cond1 != cond2`.
