# Variable type inference

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/851)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
    -   [Variable type inference in other languages](#variable-type-inference-in-other-languages)
        -   [Carbon equivalents](#carbon-equivalents)
    -   [Pattern matching](#pattern-matching)
        -   [Carbon equivalents](#carbon-equivalents-1)
    -   [Pattern matching on `if`](#pattern-matching-on-if)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Open questions](#open-questions)
    -   [Inferring a variable type from literals](#inferring-a-variable-type-from-literals)
-   [Rationale based on Carbon's goals](#rationale-based-on-carbons-goals)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Elide the type instead of using `auto`](#elide-the-type-instead-of-using-auto)
    -   [Use `_` instead of `auto`](#use-_-instead-of-auto)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

Inferring variable types is a common, and desirable, use-case. In C++, the use
of `auto` for this purpose is prevalent. We desire this enough for Carbon that
we already make prevalent use in example code.

## Background

Although [#826: Function return type inference](p0826.md) introduced the `auto`
keyword for `fn`, the use type inference in `var` should be expected to be more
prevalent.

In C++, `auto` can be used in variables as in:

```cpp
auto x = DoSomething();
```

In Carbon, we're already using `auto` extensively in examples in a similar
fashion. However, it's notable that in C++ the use of `auto` replaces the actual
type, and is likely there as a matter of backwards compatibility.

### Variable type inference in other languages

[#618: var ordering](p0618.md) chose the ordering of var based on other
languages. Most of these also provide inferred variable types.

Where the `<identifier>: <type>` syntax matches, here are a few example inferred
types:

-   [Kotlin](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/basic-syntax.html#variables):
    `var x = 5`
-   [Python](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/introduction.html): `x = 5`
-   [Rust](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/keyword.mut.html): `let mut x = 5;`
-   [Swift](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/TheBasics.html):
    `var x = 5`

Ada appears to
[require](https://learn.adacore.com/courses/intro-to-ada/chapters/strongly_typed_language.html#what-is-a-type)
a variable type in declarations.

For different syntax, [Go](https://tour.golang.org/basics/14) switches from
`var x int = 5` to `x := 5`, using the `:=` to trigger type inference.

#### Carbon equivalents

In Carbon, we have generally discussed:

```carbon
var x: auto = 5;
```

However, given precedent from other languages, we could omit this:

```carbon
var x = 5;
```

### Pattern matching

As we consider variable type inference, we need to consider how pattern matching
would be affected.

[Swift's patterns](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/ReferenceManual/Patterns.html)
support:

-   Value-binding patterns, as in:

    ```swift
    switch point {
      case let (x, y):
        ...
    }
    ```

-   Expression patterns, as in:

    ```swift
    switch point {
      case (0, 0):
        ...
      case (x, y):
        ...
    }
    ```

-   **Combining** the above, as in:

    ```swift
    switch point {
      case (x, let y):
        ...
    }
    ```

#### Carbon equivalents

With Carbon, we have generally discussed:

-   Value-binding patterns, as in:

    ```carbon
    match (point) {
      case (x: auto, y: auto):
        ...
    }
    ```

-   Expression patterns, as in:

    ```carbon
    match (point) {
      case (0, 0):
        ...
      case (x, y):
        ...
    }
    ```

-   **Combining** the above, as in:

    ```carbon
    match (point) {
      case (x, y: auto):
        ...
    }
    ```

However, it may be possible to mirror Swift's syntax more closely; for example:

-   Value-binding patterns, as in:

    ```carbon
    match (point) {
      case let (x, y):
        ...
    }
    ```

-   Expression patterns, as in:

    ```carbon
    match (point) {
      case (0, 0):
        ...
      case (x, y):
        ...
    }
    ```

-   **Combining** the above, as in:

    ```carbon
    match (point) {
      case (x, let y):
        ...
    }
    ```

In the above, this presumes to allow `let` inside a tuple in order to indicate
the variable-binding for one member of a tuple.

### Pattern matching on `if`

In Carbon, it's been suggested that `if` could support testing pattern matching
when there's only one case, for example with `auto`:

```carbon
match (point) {
  case (x, y: auto):
    // Pattern match succeeded, `y` is initialized.
  default:
    // Pattern match failed.
}

=>

if ((x, y: auto) = point) {
  // Pattern match succeeded, `y` is initialized.
} else {
  // Pattern match failed.
}
```

A `let` approach may still look like:

```carbon
match (point) {
  case (x, let y):
    // Pattern match succeeded, `y` is initialized.
  default:
    // Pattern match failed.
}

=>

if ((x, let y) = point) {
  // Pattern match succeeded, `y` is initialized.
} else {
  // Pattern match failed.
}
```

Some caveats should be considered for pattern matching tests inside `if`:

-   There is syntax overlap with C++, which allows code such as:

    ```carbon
    if (Derviced* derived = dynamic_cast<Derived*>(base)) {
      // dynamic_cast succeeded, `derived` is initialized.
    } else {
      // dynamic_cast failed.
    }
    ```

-   Syntax is similar to `match` itself; it may be worth considering whether the
    feature is
    [sufficiently distinct and valuable](/docs/project/principles/one_way.md) to
    support.

## Proposal

Carbon should offer variable type inference using `auto` in place of the type,
as in:

```carbon
var x: auto = DoSomething();
```

At present, variable type inference will simply use the type on the right side.
In particular, this means that in the case of `var y: auto = 1`, the type of `y`
is `IntLiteral(1)` rather than `i64` or similar. This
[may change](#inferring-a-variable-type-from-literals), but is the simplest
answer for now.

## Open questions

### Inferring a variable type from literals

Using the type on the right side for `var y: auto = 1` currently results in a
constant `IntLiteral` value, whereas most languages would suggest a variable
integer value. This is something that will be considered as part of type
inference in general, because it also affects generics, templates, lambdas, and
return types.

## Rationale based on Carbon's goals

-   [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
    -   Frequently code will have the type on the line, as in
        `var x: auto = CreateGeneric[Type](args)`. Avoiding repetition of the
        type will reduce the amount of code that must be read, and should allow
        readers to comprehend more quickly.
-   [Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)
    -   The intent is to have `auto` work similarly to C++'s type inference, in
        order to ease migration.

## Alternatives considered

### Elide the type instead of using `auto`

As discussed in background,
[other languages allow eliding the type](#variable-type-inference-in-other-languages).
Carbon could do similar, allowing:

```carbon
var y = 1;
```

Advantages:

-   Forms a cross-language syntax consistency with languages that put the type
    on the right side of the identifier.
    -   This is particularly strong with Kotlin and Swift, because they also use
        `var`.
-   Use of `auto` is currently unique to C++; Carbon will be extending its use.

Disadvantages:

-   Type inference becomes the _lack_ of a type, rather than the presence of
    something different.
-   C++'s syntax legacy may have needed `auto` in order to provide type
    inference, where Carbon does not.

We expect there will be long-term pushback over the cross-language
inconsistency, particularly as the `var <identifier>: auto` syntax form will be
unique to Carbon. However, there's a strong desire not to have the lack of a
type mean the type will be inferred.

### Use `_` instead of `auto`

We have discussed using `_` as a placeholder to indicate that an identifier
would be unused, as in:

```carbon
fn IgnoreArgs(_: i32) {
  // Code that doesn't need the argument.
}
```

We could use `_` instead of `auto`, leading to:

```carbon
var x: _ = 1;
```

However, removing `auto` entirely would also require using it when inferring
function return types. For example:

```carbon
fn InferReturnType() -> _ {
  return 3;
}
```

Advantages:

-   Reduces the number of keywords in Carbon.
-   Less to type.
    -   The incremental convenience may ameliorate the decision to require a
        keyword for type inference.

Disadvantages:

-   There's a feeling that `_` means "discard", which doesn't match the
    semantics of inferring a return type, since the type is not discarded.
-   There may be some ambiguities in handling, such as `var c: (_, _) = (a, b)`.
-   The reduction of typing is unlikely to address arguments that the keyword is
    not technically required.

The sense of "discard" versus "infer" semantics is why we are using `auto`.
