proposals/p0920.md, before:

# Generic blanket impls (details 5)

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/920)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Rationale based on Carbon's goals](#rationale-based-on-carbons-goals)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Different syntax](#different-syntax)
        -   [Inconsistent syntax](#inconsistent-syntax)
        -   [Members defined out-of-line](#members-defined-out-of-line)
        -   [Context sensitivity](#context-sensitivity)
    -   [Orphan rule could consider interface requirements in blanket impls](#orphan-rule-could-consider-interface-requirements-in-blanket-impls)
    -   [Child trumps parent rule](#child-trumps-parent-rule)
    -   [Impls could limit specialization](#impls-could-limit-specialization)
    -   [Libraries for orphan impls](#libraries-for-orphan-impls)
    -   [Different traversal order for overlap rule](#different-traversal-order-for-overlap-rule)
    -   [Intersection rule in addition to prioritization](#intersection-rule-in-addition-to-prioritization)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

There are cases where an impl definition should apply to more than a single type
and interface combination. The solution is to parameterize the impl definition,
so it applies to a family of types, interfaces, or both. This includes:

-   Declaring an impl for a parameterized type, which may be external or declared
    out-of-line.
-   "Conditional conformance" where a parameterized type implements some
    interface if the parameter to the type satisfies some criteria, like
    implementing the same interface.
-   "Blanket" impls where an interface is implemented for all types that
    implement another interface, or some other criteria beyond being a specific
    type.
-   "Wildcard" impls where a family of interfaces are implemented for single
    type.

In addition to a syntax for defining parameterized impls, we need rules for
coherence:

-   Orphan rules ensure that an impl is imported in any code that might use it.
-   Overlap rules pick a specific impl when more than one impl declaration
    matches a specific query about whether a type implements an interface.

## Background

Rust supports parameterized impls, but has not stabilized the specialization
feature that resolves multiple impls applying.

## Proposal

This is a proposal to add
[a "parameterized impls" section to the generics design details](/docs/design/generics/details.md#parameterized-impls).

## Rationale based on Carbon's goals

Much of this rationale for generics was captured in the
[Generics goals proposal](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/24).
This proposal is particularly concerned with achieving the goal of making
generics [coherent](/docs/design/generics/goals.md#coherence).

## Alternatives considered

### Different syntax

This conditional interface implementation syntax was decided in
[issue #575](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/575), and
clarified in
[a Discord discussion in #syntax](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/709488742942900284/903036676371259432).
A large part of what was decided in that issue is the syntax used for
non-parameterized impls, and incorporated into the Carbon generics design in
[proposal #553: Generics details part 1](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/553).

#### Inconsistent syntax

Our primary concern with the syntax for parameterized impls was that it be
consistent with non-parameterized impls, and consistent between lexically inline
and out-of-line definitions. Consistency was the basis for rejecting a number of
conditional conformance options:

-   The `extend` syntax inline in a class definition to establish a more
    specific `Self` type for conditional conformance choice was eliminated along
    with [the `extend` syntax for external impls](p0553.md#extend-blocks).
-   Consistency excluded using deduced arguments in square brackets after the
    `impl` keyword, and an `if` or `where` clause to add constraints:

    ```
    class FixedArray(T:! Type, N:! Int) {
      impl as [U:! Printable] Printable if T == U {
        // Here `T` and `U` have the same value and so you can freely
        // cast between them. The difference is that you can call the
        // `Print` method on values of type `U`.
      }
    }

    class Pair(T:! Type, U:! Type) {
      impl as Foo(T) if T == U {
        // Can cast between `Pair(T, U)` and `Pair(T, T)` since `T == U`.
      }
    }
    ```

    This was too different from how those same impls would be declared
    out-of-line.

-   Another approach that was too different between inline and out-of-line, is
    to use pattern matching instead of boolean conditions. This might look like:

    ```
    class FixedArray(T:! Type, N:! Int) {
      @if let P:! Printable = T {
        impl as Printable { ... }
      }
    }

    interface Foo(T:! Type) { ... }
    class Pair(T:! Type, U:! Type) {
      @if let Pair(T, T) = Self {
        impl as Foo(T) { ... }
      }
    }
    ```

#### Members defined out-of-line

We rejected options that declared unqualified member names outside of the scope
defining the class. This would have allowed us to consistently use an
out-of-line syntax, but starting with something other than `external` when it
affected the names in the class.

#### Context sensitivity

We rejected options for conditional conformance where the meaning of names
declared in the class scope would have a more specific meaning in an inner
scope. This would be much like how a language with
[flow-sensitive typing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow-sensitive_typing)
might affect the types in an inner scope as part of control flow. For example, a
`where` clause on an `impl` declaration might add constraints to a class
parameter only inside the scope of the `impl` it was applied to:

```
class FixedArray(T:! Type, N:! Int) {
  impl as Printable where T is Printable {
    // Inside this scope, `T` has type `Printable` instead of `Type`.
  }
}
```

These options were rejected based on the
[low-context-sensitivity principle](/docs/project/principles/low_context_sensitivity.md).

### Orphan rule could consider interface requirements in blanket impls

The orphan rule states that a rule like

```
impl [T:! Interface1] T as Interface2 { ... }
```

can only live in the library that defines `Interface2`, not the library that
defines `Interface1`. To see that the alternative is not coherent, consider this
example where we have three libraries, with one a common library imported by the
other two:

-   Library `Common`

    ```
    interface ICommon { ... }
    class S { ... }
    ```

-   Library `A`:

    ```
    import Common
    interface IA { ... }
    // Local interface only used as a constraint
    impl [T:! IA] T as ICommon { ... }
    // Fine: implementation of a local interface
    impl S as IA { ... }
    ```

-   Library `B`:

    ```
    import Common
    interface IB { ... }
    // Local interface only used as a constraint
    impl [T:! IB] T as ICommon { ... }
    // Fine: implementation of a local interface
    impl S as IB { ... }
    ```

Inside another library that imports the `Common` library:

-   Does `S` implement `ICommon`? If you just import `ICommon`, no
    implementations are visible
-   Does the answer change if you import libraries `A` or `B`?
-   Which implementation of `ICommon` should `S` use if you import both?

We avoid these problems by requiring the use of a local type or interface
**outside** of constraints.

### Child trumps parent rule

[Rust has considered a "child trumps parent" rule](http://aturon.github.io/tech/2017/02/06/specialization-and-coherence/).
This rule would say that a library `Child` importing library `Parent` is enough
to prioritize `impl` definitions in `Child` over `Parent` when they would
otherwise overlap without one matching a strict subset of the other. The goal
would be to resolve overlaps in a way that is both easy to understand and more
often matches what implementations users actually want prioritized.

One caveat of this rule is that a simple interpretation is not transitive. If we
define three impls in three different libraries, with these type structures:

-   `impl (A, ?, ?) as I`
-   `impl (?, B, ?) as I`
-   `impl (?, ?, C) as I`

then the type structure rule would prioritize `A` over `B` over `C`. If the
library with `C` had a dependency on the one with `A`, though, then `C` would
have priority over `A`, and we would not be able to decide which impl to use for
`(A, B, C)`.

The fix is to change the rule to be "Child trumps parent on their intersection".
With that rule, it would be as if there was another implementation defined on
the intersection of `(A, ?, ?)` and `(?, ?, C)`, that is it would match
`(A, ?, C)`, that had the highest priority and delegated to the `(?, ?, C)` impl
for the definition of the body.

Without some child trumps parent rule: If I define a new type, then all impl
lookup for interfaces implemented by that type as `Self` will consider impl from
my library first, at the time I define it until some other library adds an impl
of that type as `Self`. However, adding the "child trumps parent on their
intersection" rule removes this property.

This is something we would consider in the future once we have more experience.
Note that this rule has not yet been implemented in Rust, so we don't know how
it works out in practice.

### Impls could limit specialization

This would allow greater reasoning in generic functions, requiring less
specification. For example, there may be a blanket implementation of
`PartiallyOrdered` provided for types that implement `Ordered`. If that blanket
implementation could not be specialized, a generic function could rely on the
implementations of the two interfaces being consistent with each other.

This feature would be incompatible with our prioritization approach, however,
which does not result in a strict hierarchy of implementations.

### Libraries for orphan impls

The [orphan rule](/docs/design/generics/details.md#orphan-rule) means that there
may be no library that can define an impl with a particular type structure. Rust
has encountered this problem already, see
[Rust RFC #1856: "Orphan rules are stricter than we would like"](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/issues/1856).
Carbon does not currently address this problem, but we would consider future
changes that do as long as coherence was maintained. For example, we'd consider
a mechanism that allowed libraries to be defined that must be imported, either
implicitly or explicitly, depending on whether specific other libraries are
imported or linked into the project.

### Different traversal order for overlap rule

The [overlap rule](/docs/design/generics/details.md#overlap-rule) uses a
depth-first traversal of the type tree to identify the first difference between
two different type structures. We could also do another order, such as
breadth-first, but this order is both simple and reflects some experience from
the Rust community that the `Self` type is particularly important to prioritize.

### Intersection rule in addition to prioritization

Another approach for
[selecting between impls with the same type structure](/docs/design/generics/details.md#prioritization-rule)
is to require that there is an impl matching the intersection of any two impls
with the same type structure, and then prioritize by containment. This approach
is being considered for Rust, see
[Baby Steps: "Intersection Impls"](http://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2016/09/24/intersection-impls/)
and
[Aaron Turon: "Specialization, coherence, and API evolution](http://aturon.github.io/tech/2017/02/06/specialization-and-coherence/).
Instead of requiring that impls with the same type structure are always in the
same prioritization block, that requirement could be only when the intersection
isn't defined. The advantage of the prioritization block is that it can express
everything that intersection impls can express, and generally can do so without
having to write an exponential number of impl declarations. Prioritization
blocks do require you to write all the impls together in a block, though, so we
might want to support the option of allowing developers to explicitly write out
intersections instead. This might be convenient in cases where the intersection
is defined anyway, such as when there is already strict subset relationship
between the impls.

Commit message:

Final impls are future work

proposals/p0920.md, after:

# Generic blanket impls (details 5)

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/920)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Rationale based on Carbon's goals](#rationale-based-on-carbons-goals)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Different syntax](#different-syntax)
        -   [Inconsistent syntax](#inconsistent-syntax)
        -   [Members defined out-of-line](#members-defined-out-of-line)
        -   [Context sensitivity](#context-sensitivity)
    -   [Orphan rule could consider interface requirements in blanket impls](#orphan-rule-could-consider-interface-requirements-in-blanket-impls)
    -   [Child trumps parent rule](#child-trumps-parent-rule)
    -   [Impls could limit specialization](#impls-could-limit-specialization)
    -   [Libraries for orphan impls](#libraries-for-orphan-impls)
    -   [Different traversal order for overlap rule](#different-traversal-order-for-overlap-rule)
    -   [Intersection rule in addition to prioritization](#intersection-rule-in-addition-to-prioritization)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

There are cases where an impl definition should apply to more than a single type
and interface combination. The solution is to parameterize the impl definition,
so it applies to a family of types, interfaces, or both. This includes:

-   Declaring an impl for a parameterized type, which may be external or
    declared out-of-line.
-   "Conditional conformance" where a parameterized type implements some
    interface if the parameter to the type satisfies some criteria, like
    implementing the same interface.
-   "Blanket" impls where an interface is implemented for all types that
    implement another interface, or some other criteria beyond being a specific
    type.
-   "Wildcard" impls where a family of interfaces are implemented for single
    type.

In addition to a syntax for defining parameterized impls, we need rules for
coherence:

-   Orphan rules ensure that an impl is imported in any code that might use it.
-   Overlap rules pick a specific impl when more than one impl declaration
    matches a specific query about whether a type implements an interface.

## Background

Rust supports parameterized impls, but has not stabilized the specialization
feature that resolves multiple impls applying.

## Proposal

This is a proposal to add
[a "parameterized impls" section to the generics design details](/docs/design/generics/details.md#parameterized-impls).

## Rationale based on Carbon's goals

Much of this rationale for generics was captured in the
[Generics goals proposal](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/24).
This proposal is particularly concerned with achieving the goal of making
generics [coherent](/docs/design/generics/goals.md#coherence).

## Alternatives considered

### Different syntax

This conditional interface implementation syntax was decided in
[issue #575](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/575), and
clarified in
[a Discord discussion in #syntax](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/709488742942900284/903036676371259432).
A large part of what was decided in that issue is the syntax used for
non-parameterized impls, and incorporated into the Carbon generics design in
[proposal #553: Generics details part 1](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/553).

#### Inconsistent syntax

Our primary concern with the syntax for parameterized impls was that it be
consistent with non-parameterized impls, and consistent between lexically inline
and out-of-line definitions. Consistency was the basis for rejecting a number of
conditional conformance options:

-   The `extend` syntax inline in a class definition to establish a more
    specific `Self` type for conditional conformance choice was eliminated along
    with [the `extend` syntax for external impls](p0553.md#extend-blocks).
-   Consistency excluded using deduced arguments in square brackets after the
    `impl` keyword, and an `if` or `where` clause to add constraints:

    ```
    class FixedArray(T:! Type, N:! Int) {
      impl as [U:! Printable] Printable if T == U {
        // Here `T` and `U` have the same value and so you can freely
        // cast between them. The difference is that you can call the
        // `Print` method on values of type `U`.
      }
    }

    class Pair(T:! Type, U:! Type) {
      impl as Foo(T) if T == U {
        // Can cast between `Pair(T, U)` and `Pair(T, T)` since `T == U`.
      }
    }
    ```

    This was too different from how those same impls would be declared
    out-of-line.

-   Another approach that was too different between inline and out-of-line, is
    to use pattern matching instead of boolean conditions. This might look like:

    ```
    class FixedArray(T:! Type, N:! Int) {
      @if let P:! Printable = T {
        impl as Printable { ... }
      }
    }

    interface Foo(T:! Type) { ... }
    class Pair(T:! Type, U:! Type) {
      @if let Pair(T, T) = Self {
        impl as Foo(T) { ... }
      }
    }
    ```

#### Members defined out-of-line

We rejected options that declared unqualified member names outside of the scope
defining the class. This would have allowed us to consistently use an
out-of-line syntax, but starting with something other than `external` when it
affected the names in the class.

#### Context sensitivity

We rejected options for conditional conformance where the meaning of names
declared in the class scope would have a more specific meaning in an inner
scope. This would be much like how a language with
[flow-sensitive typing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow-sensitive_typing)
might affect the types in an inner scope as part of control flow. For example, a
`where` clause on an `impl` declaration might add constraints to a class
parameter only inside the scope of the `impl` it was applied to:

```
class FixedArray(T:! Type, N:! Int) {
  impl as Printable where T is Printable {
    // Inside this scope, `T` has type `Printable` instead of `Type`.
  }
}
```

These options were rejected based on the
[low-context-sensitivity principle](/docs/project/principles/low_context_sensitivity.md).

### Orphan rule could consider interface requirements in blanket impls

The orphan rule states that a rule like

```
impl [T:! Interface1] T as Interface2 { ... }
```

can only live in the library that defines `Interface2`, not the library that
defines `Interface1`. To see that the alternative is not coherent, consider this
example where we have three libraries, with one a common library imported by the
other two:

-   Library `Common`

    ```
    interface ICommon { ... }
    class S { ... }
    ```

-   Library `A`:

    ```
    import Common
    interface IA { ... }
    // Local interface only used as a constraint
    impl [T:! IA] T as ICommon { ... }
    // Fine: implementation of a local interface
    impl S as IA { ... }
    ```

-   Library `B`:

    ```
    import Common
    interface IB { ... }
    // Local interface only used as a constraint
    impl [T:! IB] T as ICommon { ... }
    // Fine: implementation of a local interface
    impl S as IB { ... }
    ```

Inside another library that imports the `Common` library:

-   Does `S` implement `ICommon`? If you just import `ICommon`, no
    implementations are visible
-   Does the answer change if you import libraries `A` or `B`?
-   Which implementation of `ICommon` should `S` use if you import both?

We avoid these problems by requiring the use of a local type or interface
**outside** of constraints.

### Child trumps parent rule

[Rust has considered a "child trumps parent" rule](http://aturon.github.io/tech/2017/02/06/specialization-and-coherence/).
This rule would say that a library `Child` importing library `Parent` is enough
to prioritize `impl` definitions in `Child` over `Parent` when they would
otherwise overlap without one matching a strict subset of the other. The goal
would be to resolve overlaps in a way that is both easy to understand and more
often matches what implementations users actually want prioritized.

One caveat of this rule is that a simple interpretation is not transitive. If we
define three impls in three different libraries, with these type structures:

-   `impl (A, ?, ?) as I`
-   `impl (?, B, ?) as I`
-   `impl (?, ?, C) as I`

then the type structure rule would prioritize `A` over `B` over `C`. If the
library with `C` had a dependency on the one with `A`, though, then `C` would
have priority over `A`, and we would not be able to decide which impl to use for
`(A, B, C)`.

The fix is to change the rule to be "Child trumps parent on their intersection".
With that rule, it would be as if there was another implementation defined on
the intersection of `(A, ?, ?)` and `(?, ?, C)`, that is it would match
`(A, ?, C)`, that had the highest priority and delegated to the `(?, ?, C)` impl
for the definition of the body.

Without some child trumps parent rule: If I define a new type, then all impl
lookup for interfaces implemented by that type as `Self` will consider impl from
my library first, at the time I define it until some other library adds an impl
of that type as `Self`. However, adding the "child trumps parent on their
intersection" rule removes this property.

This is something we would consider in the future once we have more experience.
Note that this rule has not yet been implemented in Rust, so we don't know how
it works out in practice.

### Impls could limit specialization

This would allow greater reasoning in generic functions, requiring less
specification. For example, there may be a blanket implementation of
`PartiallyOrdered` provided for types that implement `Ordered`. If that blanket
implementation could not be specialized, a generic function could rely on the
implementations of the two interfaces being consistent with each other.

This feature has been left for a future proposal. Note this feature needs to be
limited to those cases where the implementation that limits specialization will
be guaranteed to be a dependency of all implementations that are prioritized as
more specific.

### Libraries for orphan impls

The [orphan rule](/docs/design/generics/details.md#orphan-rule) means that there
may be no library that can define an impl with a particular type structure. Rust
has encountered this problem already, see
[Rust RFC #1856: "Orphan rules are stricter than we would like"](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/issues/1856).
Carbon does not currently address this problem, but we would consider future
changes that do as long as coherence was maintained. For example, we'd consider
a mechanism that allowed libraries to be defined that must be imported, either
implicitly or explicitly, depending on whether specific other libraries are
imported or linked into the project.

### Different traversal order for overlap rule

The [overlap rule](/docs/design/generics/details.md#overlap-rule) uses a
depth-first traversal of the type tree to identify the first difference between
two different type structures. We could also do another order, such as
breadth-first, but this order is both simple and reflects some experience from
the Rust community that the `Self` type is particularly important to prioritize.

### Intersection rule in addition to prioritization

Another approach for
[selecting between impls with the same type structure](/docs/design/generics/details.md#prioritization-rule)
is to require that there is an impl matching the intersection of any two impls
with the same type structure, and then prioritize by containment. This approach
is being considered for Rust, see
[Baby Steps: "Intersection Impls"](http://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2016/09/24/intersection-impls/)
and
[Aaron Turon: "Specialization, coherence, and API evolution](http://aturon.github.io/tech/2017/02/06/specialization-and-coherence/).
Instead of requiring that impls with the same type structure are always in the
same prioritization block, that requirement could be only when the intersection
isn't defined. The advantage of the prioritization block is that it can express
everything that intersection impls can express, and generally can do so without
having to write an exponential number of impl declarations. Prioritization
blocks do require you to write all the impls together in a block, though, so we
might want to support the option of allowing developers to explicitly write out
intersections instead. This might be convenient in cases where the intersection
is defined anyway, such as when there is already strict subset relationship
between the impls.
