# Generic impls access (details 4)

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/931)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Rationale based on Carbon's goals](#rationale-based-on-carbons-goals)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Private impls for public types](#private-impls-for-public-types)
    -   [Private interfaces in public API files](#private-interfaces-in-public-api-files)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

Should a type be able to declare an impls to be private, like it can for its
data and methods? There are some use cases for this feature, but those use cases
generally could also be addressed by implementing the interface on a private
adapter type instead.

## Background

Private impls have been considered but not implemented for Swift in the
[scoped conformances pitch](https://forums.swift.org/t/scoped-conformances/37159).

## Proposal

This is a proposal to add to
[this design document on generics details](/docs/design/generics/details.md).
The additions are:

-   to say impls do not allow access control modifiers and are always as public
    as the names used in the signature of the impl; and
-   to document how to use private adapter types instead.

## Rationale based on Carbon's goals

We decided to make generics coherent as part of accepting proposal
[#24: generics goals](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/24).
This approach is consistent with broader Carbon goals that Carbon have
[code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write).
In particular, we favor making code
[less context sensitive](/docs/project/principles/low_context_sensitivity.md).

## Alternatives considered

### Private impls for public types

We considered supporting private impls for public types. This was motivated by
using the conversion of a `struct` type to a `class` type to construct class
values. In the case that the class had private data members, we wanted to
restrict that conversion so it was only available in the bodies of class members
or friends of the class. We considered achieving that goal by saying that the
implementation of the conversion would be private in that case. Allowing impls
to generally be private, though, led to a number of coherence concerns that the
same code would behave differently in different files. Our solution was to
address these conversions using a different approach that only addressed the
conversion use case:

-   Users could not implement `struct` to `class` conversions themselves.
-   The compiler would generate `struct` to `class` conversions for constructing
    class values itself.
-   Those conversion impls will always be as visible as the class type, and will
    still be selected using the same rules as other impls.
-   When one of these compiler-generated conversion impls is selected, the
    compiler would perform an access control check to see if it was allowed.

We believe that other use cases for restricting access to an impl are better
accomplished by using a private adapter type than supporting private impls.

### Private interfaces in public API files

The idea is that a private interface may only be implemented by a single
library, which gives the library full control. However, putting that interface
declaration in an API file would allow it to be referenced in named constraints
available to users. All impls for that interface would also have to be declared
in the API file, unless they were for a private type declared in that library.

This would allow you to express things like:

-   A named constraint that is satisfied for any type **not** implementing
    interface `Foo`:

    ```
    class TrueType {}
    class FalseType {}
    private interface NotFooImpl {
      let T:! Type;
    }
    impl [T:! Foo] T as NotFooImpl {
      let T:! Type = FalseType;
    }
    impl [T:! Type] T as NotFooImpl {
      let T:! Type = TrueType;
    }
    constraint NotFoo {
      extends NotFooImpl where .T == TrueType;
    }
    ```

-   A named constraint that ensures `CommonType` is implemented symmetrically:

    ```
    // For users to implement for types
    interface CommonTypeWith(U:! Type) {
      let Result:! Type where ...;
    }

    // internal library detail
    private interface AutoCommonTypeWith(U:! Type) {
      let Result:! Type where ...;
    }

    // To use as the requirement for parameters
    constraint CommonType(U:! AutoCommonTypeWith(Self)) {
      extends AutoCommonTypeWith(U) where .Result == U.Result;
    }

    match_first {
      impl [T:! Type, U:! ManualCommonTypeWith(T)]
          T as AutoCommonTypeWith(U) {
        let Result:! auto = U.Result;
      }
      impl [T:! Type, U:! ManualCommonTypeWith(T)]
          U as AutoCommonTypeWith(T) {
        let Result:! auto = U.Result;
      }
    }
    ```

This feature is something we might consider adding in the future.
