proposals/p0950.md, before:

# Generics details 6: remove facets

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/950)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
-   [Rationale based on Carbon's goals](#rationale-based-on-carbons-goals)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Status quo: facet types](#status-quo-facet-types)
    -   [Name lookup in type and type-of-type](#name-lookup-in-type-and-type-of-type)
    -   [Generic 'let' erases connection to original type](#generic-let-erases-connection-to-original-type)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

There were some concerns about facet types leaking out of generic code in return
types. Some initial fixes for this were done in
[PR #900](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/900), but there
remain concerns.

We also think we can simplify the model by moving away from automatic casting to
facet types.

## Background

TODO: Is there any background that readers should consider to fully understand
this problem and your approach to solving it?

## Proposal

TODO: Briefly and at a high level, how do you propose to solve the problem? Why
will that in fact solve it?

## Details

TODO: Fully explain the details of the proposed solution.

## Rationale based on Carbon's goals

TODO: How does this proposal effectively advance Carbon's goals? Rather than
re-stating the full motivation, this should connect that motivation back to
Carbon's stated goals for the project or language. This may evolve during
review. Use links to appropriate goals, for example:

-   [Community and culture](/docs/project/goals.md#community-and-culture)
-   [Language tools and ecosystem](/docs/project/goals.md#language-tools-and-ecosystem)
-   [Performance-critical software](/docs/project/goals.md#performance-critical-software)
-   [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution)
-   [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
-   [Practical safety and testing mechanisms](/docs/project/goals.md#practical-safety-and-testing-mechanisms)
-   [Fast and scalable development](/docs/project/goals.md#fast-and-scalable-development)
-   [Modern OS platforms, hardware architectures, and environments](/docs/project/goals.md#modern-os-platforms-hardware-architectures-and-environments)
-   [Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)

## Alternatives considered

TODO: What alternative solutions have you considered?

https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/708431657849585705/905248525028323368

[open discussion 2021-11-08](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cRrhRrmaUf2hVi2lFcHsYo2j0jI6t9RGZoYjWhRxp14/edit?resourcekey=0-xWHBEZ8zIqnJiB4yfBSLfA#heading=h.ec285oam2okw)

[open discussion 2021-11-11](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cRrhRrmaUf2hVi2lFcHsYo2j0jI6t9RGZoYjWhRxp14/edit?resourcekey=0-xWHBEZ8zIqnJiB4yfBSLfA#heading=h.8vuatm82d1mk)

### Status quo: facet types

FIXME

### Name lookup in type and type-of-type

FIXME

### Generic 'let' erases connection to original type

FIXME

OPTION A
[here](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/708431657849585705/908834806551445554)

Commit message:

Some more work on alternatives considered

proposals/p0950.md, after:

# Generics details 6: remove facets

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/950)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
-   [Rationale based on Carbon's goals](#rationale-based-on-carbons-goals)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Status quo: facet types](#status-quo-facet-types)
    -   [Name lookup in type and type-of-type](#name-lookup-in-type-and-type-of-type)
    -   [Generic 'let' erases connection to original type](#generic-let-erases-connection-to-original-type)
    -   [No generic 'let'](#no-generic-let)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

There were some concerns about facet types leaking out of generic code in return
types. Some initial fixes for this were done in
[PR #900](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/900), but there
remain concerns.

We also think we can simplify the model by moving away from automatic casting to
facet types.

## Background

TODO: Is there any background that readers should consider to fully understand
this problem and your approach to solving it?

## Proposal

TODO: Briefly and at a high level, how do you propose to solve the problem? Why
will that in fact solve it?

## Details

TODO: Fully explain the details of the proposed solution.

## Rationale based on Carbon's goals

TODO: How does this proposal effectively advance Carbon's goals? Rather than
re-stating the full motivation, this should connect that motivation back to
Carbon's stated goals for the project or language. This may evolve during
review. Use links to appropriate goals, for example:

-   [Community and culture](/docs/project/goals.md#community-and-culture)
-   [Language tools and ecosystem](/docs/project/goals.md#language-tools-and-ecosystem)
-   [Performance-critical software](/docs/project/goals.md#performance-critical-software)
-   [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution)
-   [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
-   [Practical safety and testing mechanisms](/docs/project/goals.md#practical-safety-and-testing-mechanisms)
-   [Fast and scalable development](/docs/project/goals.md#fast-and-scalable-development)
-   [Modern OS platforms, hardware architectures, and environments](/docs/project/goals.md#modern-os-platforms-hardware-architectures-and-environments)
-   [Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)

## Alternatives considered

TODO: What alternative solutions have you considered?

[#typesystem discussion in Discord on Nov 2](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/708431657849585705/905248525028323368)

Nov 3 doc by zygoloid:
[Member lookup in generic and non-generic contexts](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-vw39x5YARpUZ0uD2xmKepLEKG7_u122CUJ67hNz3hk/edit#)

Nov 4 doc by mconst and josh11b:
[problem: facets exposed from generics to calling code](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1C1eIzd6JY0ooE1rDjW1vx7e3i7sgGugCA9bPMRhwWM0/edit#)

[open discussion 2021-11-08](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cRrhRrmaUf2hVi2lFcHsYo2j0jI6t9RGZoYjWhRxp14/edit?resourcekey=0-xWHBEZ8zIqnJiB4yfBSLfA#heading=h.ec285oam2okw)

[open discussion 2021-11-11](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cRrhRrmaUf2hVi2lFcHsYo2j0jI6t9RGZoYjWhRxp14/edit?resourcekey=0-xWHBEZ8zIqnJiB4yfBSLfA#heading=h.8vuatm82d1mk)

### Status quo: facet types

FIXME

### Name lookup in type and type-of-type

FIXME

### Generic 'let' erases connection to original type

FIXME

OPTION A
[here](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/708431657849585705/908834806551445554)

### No generic 'let'

FIXME

chandlerc believes including generic `let` is more consistent

Allows replicating the change in type behavior of calling a generic function
without having to introduce a function call.
