# Arithmetic expressions

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1083)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
    -   [Symbols](#symbols)
    -   [Semantics](#semantics)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Rationale based on Carbon's goals](#rationale-based-on-carbons-goals)
    -   [Choice of operator symbols](#choice-of-operator-symbols)
    -   [Signed integer semantics](#signed-integer-semantics)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Use a sufficiently wide result type to avoid overflow](#use-a-sufficiently-wide-result-type-to-avoid-overflow)
    -   [Guarantee that the program never proceeds with an incorrect value after overflow](#guarantee-that-the-program-never-proceeds-with-an-incorrect-value-after-overflow)
    -   [Guarantee that all integer arithmetic is two's complement](#guarantee-that-all-integer-arithmetic-is-twos-complement)
    -   [Treat overflow as an error but don't optimize on it](#treat-overflow-as-an-error-but-dont-optimize-on-it)
    -   [Don't let `Unsigned` arithmetic wrap](#dont-let-unsigned-arithmetic-wrap)
    -   [Provide separate wrapping types](#provide-separate-wrapping-types)
    -   [Do not provide an ordering or division for `uN`](#do-not-provide-an-ordering-or-division-for-un)
    -   [Give unary `-` lower precedence](#give-unary---lower-precedence)
    -   [Include a unary plus operator](#include-a-unary-plus-operator)
    -   [Floating-point modulo operator](#floating-point-modulo-operator)
    -   [Provide different division operators](#provide-different-division-operators)
    -   [Use different division and modulo semantics](#use-different-division-and-modulo-semantics)
    -   [Use different precedence groups for division and multiplication](#use-different-precedence-groups-for-division-and-multiplication)
    -   [Use the same precedence group for modulo and multiplication](#use-the-same-precedence-group-for-modulo-and-multiplication)
    -   [Use a different spelling for modulo](#use-a-different-spelling-for-modulo)
-   [Future work](#future-work)
    -   [Provide separate wrapping operators](#provide-separate-wrapping-operators)
    -   [Provide separate operations to detect overflow](#provide-separate-operations-to-detect-overflow)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

Carbon needs a set of arithmetic operators in order to perform basic
calculations on various kinds of built-in and user-defined numbers and
number-like values: integers, real numbers, complex numbers, vectors, matrices,
and so on.

## Background

### Symbols

Conventions for arithmetic operators have a very long tradition. The following
symbols have common meaning across C, C++, Java, JavaScript, Rust, Swift, and
many other languages:

-   `+` and `-` mean addition and subtraction, as in mathematics. Unary `-`
    forms a negated value -- an additive inverse. Sometimes, unary `+` is
    permitted, as a no-op.
-   `*` means multiplication, diverging from the use of '×', '⋅', or simply
    juxtaposition in normal mathematical notation. However, this symbol does
    have some visual similarity to '×'.
-   `/` means division, diverging from the use of '÷', fraction notation, or an
    exponent of -1 in mathematics. However, this symbol does somewhat visually
    resemble fractional notation that has "fallen over" to the left.
-   `%` means remainder, diverging from the use of the word "mod" in
    mathematics, and, perhaps confusingly, resembling the '÷' division operator
    from mathematics.

### Semantics

Efficient integer types often have finite bounds on the numbers they can
represent, and we expect Carbon's to be no different. This presents a problem
for operations that might produce values outside those bounds: what should the
behavior of a primitive arithmetic operation be if the result cannot be
represented? Moreover, some operations, such as division by zero, have no
mathematically-defined result.

Different languages take different approaches to this problem.

-   In C and C++, signed integer overflow and division by zero -- including
    floating-point division by zero -- have undefined behavior, meaning that
    there are no constraints on the behavior of a program that performs such a
    calculation.
-   In [Rust](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/0560-integer-overflow.html),
    these conditions are classified as being errors, which, depending on various
    factors, will either panic or give a two's complement result. Rust also
    provides a `Wrapping<T>` type, where `T` is a signed or unsigned integer
    type, that provides arithmetic with guaranteed two's complement wrapping
    semantics.
-   In Swift, overflow triggers a runtime fatal error. Arithmetic operators can
    be prefixed with `&`, such as `big_num &* other_big_num`, to request two's
    complement wrapping behavior instead.
-   In Java, integer arithmetic has two's complement wrapping behavior. Division
    by zero throws an exception.
-   In JavaScript, all arithmetic is (at least notionally) performed in IEEE 754
    double-precision floating-point, so all operations have defined results,
    although some integer operations may produce non-integer results, such as
    infinities or NaNs, and some produce incorrect integer results. For example,
    in JavaScript, `100000001 * 100000001` evaluates to `10000000200000000` not
    to `10000000200000001`.
-   In LLVM, the result of overflow is a poison value, which results in
    undefined behavior only when it is observed, for example by a branch, and
    otherwise propagates to dependent values. This permits speculative execution
    of arithmetic that might overflow.

## Proposal

Carbon will provide the five usual binary arithmetic operators -- `+`, `-`, `*`,
`/`, and `%` -- with their usual semantics. A unary minus `-` operator will also
be provided, but no unary plus `+` operator.

| Notation | Meaning            |
| -------- | ------------------ |
| `-a`     | Negation           |
| `a + b`  | Addition           |
| `a - b`  | Subtraction        |
| `a * b`  | Multiplication     |
| `a / b`  | Division           |
| `a % b`  | Modulo / remainder |

These operators follow the same precedence rules as in C-family languages --
multiplicative operators bind tighter than additive operators, and negation
binds tighter than multiplicative operators. Unlike in other C-family languages,
no precedence is defined between `%` and other binary operators, so
`a + b % c * d` is an error, and does not mean `a + (b % c) * d` as it would in
C++.

Unlike in C++, lossy conversions are never performed. Instead, built-in
arithmetic is not permitted unless one of the operand types can represent all
the values of the other operand. The calculation is performed in that operand
type; there is no implicit widening to Carbon's equivalent of `int`.

Unsigned integer types `uN` model arithmetic modulo 2<sup>`N`</sup>, and we
strongly advise that they are not used except when those semantics are desired,
such as in random number generation, cryptography, hashing, and similar domains.

For signed integer types `iN`, it is a programming error if overflow occurs. We
guarantee that in development build modes such errors will result in a runtime
trap, and that in hardened build modes the result will either be a trap or the
two's complement value.

Initially, no support will be provided for wrapping signed integer arithmetic,
nor for non-wrapping unsigned integer arithmetic. This can be added by a future
proposal if we find there is sufficient demand for either.

Floating-point types use IEEE 754 semantics, with round-to-nearest rounding
mode, no signaling NaNs, and no floating-point exceptions.

This proposal takes no position on whether the `+` operator is supported on
strings to perform concatenation.

See the changes to the design for more details; the rest of this proposal will
focus on the rationale and alternatives.

## Rationale based on Carbon's goals

-   [Language tools and ecosystem](/docs/project/goals.md#language-tools-and-ecosystem)
    -   Treating overflow as a programming error empowers static and dynamic
        analysis tools to distinguish arithmetic bugs from intentional
        wraparound.
-   [Performance-critical software](/docs/project/goals.md#performance-critical-software)
    -   Allowing the optimizer to assume that signed integer overflow does not
        occur in performance build modes allows certain important loop
        optimizations to fire that would otherwise be incorrect.
    -   Avoiding extending into larger types when performing arithmetic on small
        operands aids in the ability to vectorize.
-   [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution)
    -   Each subexpression of an arithmetic expression is given a specific type,
        rather than being computed in a type of sufficient width for any
        possible value, in order to make it simple to factor out subexpressions.
-   [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
    -   Using the same operators as other languages, with largely the same
        semantics as C++, should aid readability and writability especially for
        those with less Carbon-specific knowledge.
    -   Performing built-in arithmetic in the larger operand type and refusing
        cases where a lossy conversion would be performed in C++ reduces the
        scope for confusion and surprises.
-   [Practical safety and testing mechanisms](/docs/project/goals.md#practical-safety-and-testing-mechanisms)
    -   Treating signed integer overflow as an error condition, and having it
        produce a runtime error in some build modes, will assist with certain
        forms of testing and with analysis of program behavior. For example,
        fuzz testing can be used to locate overflow bugs, with confidence that
        any overflow detected is unintentional.
-   [Modern OS platforms, hardware architectures, and environments](/docs/project/goals.md#modern-os-platforms-hardware-architectures-and-environments)
    -   The choice of division and modulo semantics aims to provide fast
        execution and small code size on modern hardware architectures.
-   [Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)
    -   Using the same operator set as C++ may aid migration of C++ developers
        and make code using interop between Carbon and C++ easier to follow.
    -   Making similar choices for the behavior of signed and unsigned types
        will make a correct but unidiomatic conversion of C++ into Carbon
        easier; however, in idiomatic Carbon, signed types are expected to be
        used more frequently.

### Choice of operator symbols

We want Carbon to provide a close analogue of standard mathematical expression
notation, with some unsurprising set of operators. While accessibility to
beginners is important, the most important audience for which the operators set
should be unsurprising is programmers with C++ or Rust experience. The choice of
`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, and `%` is ubiquitous among programming languages, and any
significant change to this symbol set for the benefit of programming novices
with a mathematical background would be a detriment to those with a background
in other programming languages.

Therefore we choose the conventional symbol set.

### Signed integer semantics

Carbon prioritizes fast and predictable performance above all other factors.
Allowing an optimizer to assume that certain forms of arithmetic do not result
in overflow can improve program performance and allow the generation of smaller
code. Moreover, while in general we only want to provide the means for accessing
the fastest possible implementation of an operation, we expect integer
arithmetic to be so ubiquitous that it's important that the most efficient
option be the default option.

At the same time, it's important that Carbon code can be used in safety-critical
scenarios where unbounded undefined behavior on integer arithmetic is
problematic, so in a hardened build mode, we provide stronger guarantees.

## Alternatives considered

### Use a sufficiently wide result type to avoid overflow

We could define that integer operators always produce a sufficiently wide result
type such that overflow never occurs, and defer all overflow handling --
checking for out-of-bounds values, wrapping around, or a programmer assertion
that overflow simply doesn't happen -- until the end of the computation or some
explicit step.

For example:

```
fn F(a: i32, b: i32, c: i32) {
  // a * b is computed in i63,
  // ... + c is computed in i64.
  // =! is an assertion that the value is in-range.
  let d: i32 =! a * b + c;

  // Same, but =% says to wrap around.
  let e: i32 =% a * b + c;

  // If the value doesn't fit in the specified type, pattern-matching fails.
  let f: i32 = a * b + c else { return; }
}
```

We could put a limit on how large an intermediate type can be, and reject if it
would require a larger intermediate operand than the largest we can efficiently
support.

This approach seems quite promising, but close inspection finds a number of
non-trivial issues.

Advantages:

-   No implicit undefined behavior or incorrect results on overflow.
-   Forces developer to think about the possibility of overflow and write down
    what they intend to happen.
-   If the final assignment is `=%` or `=!`, all intermediate arithmetic other
    than division and remainder can be done in the result type, avoiding the
    need for wide computations.

Disadvantages:

-   This approach is novel and it's unknown whether developers would accept its
    ergonomic burden.
-   Decreases the uniformity of the model. While we can generalize `=!` to mean
    "assign assuming the RHS fits into the LHS", there doesn't seem to be any
    good generalization of `=%` to other situations and types.
-   The largest type for which we can truly efficiently perform arithmetic is
    `i64` / `u64`. While 128-bit arithmetic is typically available on our target
    architectures, use of it will often be less efficient and may increase
    register pressure. Calculations as simple as `(a + b) / c` may be rejected
    if the operands are already in the largest efficient type.
-   Operations such as negation and division can increase the width of the
    operand: `-i32.Min` and `i32.Min / -1` don't fit in `i32`. The following
    approaches to this problem were considered:
    -   Remove the `Min` value from `iN` types, so the negative and positive
        range are identical. However, this would severely violate programmer
        expectations, for example in some important bit-manipulation cases.
    -   Give integer types a range of values rather than simply a bit-width. For
        example, we can say that negation on `i32` produces a type that can
        represent [-2<sup>31</sup>+1, 2<sup>31</sup>], which still fits in 32
        bits. However, this would add significant complexity to the type system,
        and with this approach, division would still increase the bit width: for
        example, `a / b`, where `a` and `b` are `iN`s, has 2<sup>`N`</sup>+1
        distinct possible values. This is especially surprising because integer
        division is usually expected to make a number smaller!
-   Refactoring code becomes more challenging, as the appropriate intermediate
    type must be determined. Mitigating this, the type system would inform the
    programmer when they make a mistake.
-   The `!` and `%` annotations become quite viral: they would be needed not
    only in initialization and assignment, but likely also in `case`, `return`,
    and other initialization contexts not using `=`. As an alternative, the
    annotation could be put on the outermost arithmetic operator, but that is
    likely to be syntactically awkward, especially in unparenthesized
    expressions such as `a + b +% c`.
-   It will likely become idiomatic in many communities to either always use `%`
    or always use `!`.
    -   Always using `!` means that the developers see no benefit compared to
        the behavior as proposed here, and nonetheless pay an ergonomic cost.
    -   Always using `%` means that we lose any ability to distinguish between
        intentional wraparound and overflow, making a class of bugs that would
        otherwise be easily detectible be undetectable without making the
        program behavior correct.
-   Division by zero is still not handled.

### Guarantee that the program never proceeds with an incorrect value after overflow

We could say that overflow errors always result in program termination, possibly
with the permission for the compiler to give the mathematically correct result
instead if it so chooses.

This would result in slower and larger code being generated in a lot of cases.
Some optimizations would still be possible if the optimizer could ensure that it
only increased the set of cases for which the correct result is given, but
current optimizers are not well-suited to perform that task.

Given Carbon's emphasis on performance, this approach is rejected without
prejudice until we have a demonstration that no important performance metric is
harmed by it.

### Guarantee that all integer arithmetic is two's complement

Instead of making overflow a programming error, we could define it as two's
complement. This is, for example, the approach taken by Java.

The major problem with this approach is that it makes erroneous wrapping and
intentional wrapping indistinguishable. This would make finding such bugs much
harder for readers of the code, and all but impossible for static and dynamic
analysis tools. Making overflow issues programming errors allows problems to be
caught earlier and more reliably.

### Treat overflow as an error but don't optimize on it

We could follow Rust and say that overflow is an error, but that we promise
we'll either catch it or give two's complement semantics. This approach is
currently rejected for the same reason we reject
[guaranteeing we catch all cases where we can't give a correct result](#guarantee-that-the-program-never-proceeds-with-an-incorrect-value-after-overflow).

### Don't let `Unsigned` arithmetic wrap

We could treat `Unsigned(N)` like `Integer(N)`, and make it an error by default
if it overflows. However, this doesn't seem like a great fit for the problem
domain.

There are, broadly speaking, two different classes of use cases we want to
support:

-   Cases where the developer wants a number. They might have some expectation
    of the range of the number -- eg, non-negative, or strictly positive, or
    between -1 and 100 -- or they might just want a number and not have explicit
    bounds. We expect `iN` to be used for all such cases, and do not want to
    treat the non-negative cases as a distinct and special type.
-   Cases where the developer wants the ring ℤ/2<sup>n</sup>ℤ of integers modulo
    2<sup>n</sup>, for example in cryptography, hashing, or random number
    generation.

The second class is certainly rarer than the first, but contains many important
use cases.

The typical arguments for using an unsigned type for the first class of use
cases are:

-   Better expression of developer intent. It is generally preferable to make
    invalid states unrepresentable, and if negative numbers are invalid, then
    unsigned types are better suited than signed types. However, supporting this
    use case with the same types used to support the wrapping use cases results
    in a situation where one side or the other has to make compromises. The
    alternative would be to have three different kinds of type: signed,
    unsigned, and modulo. But in that setup, it's not clear that the value added
    by unsigned types is worthwhile. Also, it's common to want to take the
    difference of such unsigned quantities, and it's generally preferable for
    such subtractions to produce a negative result rather than a subtle bug.
    Moreover, while a restriction to non-negative values is common, supporting
    only the case of a range restriction to [0, 2<sup>N</sup>-1], but not any
    other range, does not do a good job of addressing the general desire to
    capture intent and to make invalid states unrepresentable.
-   Ability to reduce storage size. Spending a sign bit every time a number is
    stored, even when it's known to be non-negative is wasteful. This is an
    important concern, and one we should address, but it's thought to be better
    to address this by annotating a field with a description of how it should be
    packed -- such as in a bit-field -- rather than by changing the type of the
    data and possibly the behavior of operations on it.

Additionally, providing unsigned types for which overflow is an error introduces
a much larger risk of that error state being inadvertently reached than for
signed types, because calculations typically involve numbers that are close to
zero, which is far from overflowing in signed types but near to overflowing in
unsigned types. For example, a calculation such as `a - b + c` may be known to
always produce a non-negative result, and the developer may be tempted to use
non-negative non-wrapping types for `a`, `b`, and `c`, but doing so introduces
the risk that the intermediate `a - b` calculation is negative. By contrast,
overflow would only occur in a signed calculation if the numbers involved were
very large.

### Provide separate wrapping types

We could provide distinct types for wrapping versus non-wrapping use cases,
independent of the choice of signedness. This approach is being followed by
Rust.

Advantages:

-   Avoids coupling two decisions that are logically independent.
-   Allows developer intent to be expressed more explicitly, in the case where
    the intent is a non-negative but non-wrapping integer.

Disadvantages:

-   Twice as many kinds of integer types, likely meaning twice as many `impl`s
    need to be defined for each operation, twice as many overloads in each
    overload set, and so on.
-   The presence of unsigned types for which overflow is an error has a greater
    risk of inadvertent overflow, as described in the previous section.
-   Less familiar to those coming from C++.

### Do not provide an ordering or division for `uN`

For arithmetic purposes, we treat `uN` as the integers modulo 2<sup>N</sup>.
There is no single canonical total order for that ring, and because
multiplication by even numbers loses information by discarding the high-order
bit, not all non-zero numbers have
[multiplicative inverses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modular_multiplicative_inverse),
and so division is not well-defined. We could be more mathematically pure by
refusing to implement `<` and friends for `uN`, and similarly refusing to
support `/`.

However, the `uN` types exist as much for pragmatic purposes as for mathematical
ones. Making the choice to treat all `uN` values as non-negative is somewhat
arbitrary, but is both unsurprising to those coming from C++ and useful for the
cases where some ordering is desired.

### Give unary `-` lower precedence

In this proposal, `- a * b` is interpreted as `(-a) * b`. We could instead
interpret it as `- (a * b)`.

Advantages:

-   Can be argued as better following mathematical convention.

Disadvantages:

-   Unfamiliar to people coming from most other programming languages, including
    C++.
-   If we followed our normal precedence partial ordering rule, this would mean
    that `a * -b` is invalid, because `*` has higher precedence than `-`.

Comparison to other languages:

-   C and C++ give all unary operators (including unary `-` and unary `+`)
    higher precedence than any binary operator.
-   Go, Rust, and Swift give unary `-` higher precedence than multiplication.
-   Python binds unary `-` more tightly than multiplication but less tightly
    than exponentiation, so `- a * b` is `(- a) * b` but `- a ** b` is
    `- (a ** b)`.
-   Haskell gives unary `-` the same precedence as binary `-` and rejects
    `a * - b`.

### Include a unary plus operator

C and C++ include a unary `+` operator. In principle, this operator permits
lists of numbers to be written with an operator attached to each:

```cpp
int arr[] = {
  -100,
  -50,
  +20,
  +400
};
```

... but in practice this use case is rare at best, and unary `+` in C++ is
instead mainly used to coerce operands to prvalues of built-in types. For
example, `auto *p = +[]{ /*...*/ };` might be used to create a function pointer
(`auto` deduction would fail without the unary `+` operator), and
`min(+Class::static_member, x)` might be used to force `Class::static_member` to
be loaded, to avoid requiring the static member to be defined.

Such usage of `+` is a design wart that we need not replicate. If we want a
mechanism to decay an operand, we can pick a better name for it than `+`.

### Floating-point modulo operator

It would be possible and sometimes useful to support the `%` operator for
floating-point types.

Advantages:

-   When desired, `f1 % f2` would be a more concise notation than a call to an
    `fmod` function (however it is named).

Disadvantages:

-   Uses of this operation would likely be rare and unfamiliar enough that
    people would assume an integer operation is being performed when they see
    the operator.
-   This operation is not available in hardware in many modern architectures,
    and providing it as a built-in operator may create a false impression of its
    implementation as a non-trivial library function.
-   We lack sufficient evidence of utility to propose it at this time.

### Provide different division operators

We could follow Python3 and provide an `/` operator for integers that produces a
floating-point (or perhaps rational) type. This would be mathematically clean:
ignoring overflow and precision loss, all standard properties for division would
be maintained. Or we could follow Haskell and refuse to provide an `/` operator
between integers on the basis that such division is not mathematically defined
for that type. Or we could provide a division operator that produces a pair of
dividend and modulo, or an `Optional(Int)` that is absent whenever the division
is inexact. In each case, functionality not available through operators could be
provided with named functions instead.

All of these options are likely to be surprising to programmers coming from C++,
to a level that outweighs the perceived benefit.

### Use different division and modulo semantics

There are multiple somewhat-reasonable ways to define division operations for
signed integers (whether we provide those operations as operators or library
functions). Assuming operator notation for now, and that we define modulo as
`a % b == a - a / b * b`, the following options all have merit:

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
| Property                             | Round towards zero (truncating division) | Round towards negative infinity (floor division) | Round based on sign of divisor\[1] (Euclidean division) |
| ------------------------------------ | -------- | -------- | --------- |
| `(-a) / b ==`<br>` a / (-b)`         | :+1: Yes | :+1: Yes | No        |
| `(-a) / b ==`<br>` -(a / b)`         | :+1: Yes | No       | :+1: Yes  |
| `a / (-b)  ==`<br>` -(a / b)`        | :+1: Yes | No       | No        |
| `(a + k * b) / b`<br>` == a / b + k` | No       | :+1: Yes | :+1: Yes  |
| Sign of `a % b`                      | Same as `a` | :+1: Same as `b` | :+1: Never negative |
| x86 instruction?                     | :+1: Yes: `cqo` (or similar) + `idiv` | First option + fixup:<br> `s * (a / (s * b))` where `s` is `sign(a) * sign(b)`[2] | First option + fixup:<br>`a / b - (a % b < 0)` |
| LLVM IR + optimization support       | :+1: Yes | No       | No        |
| Use in existing languages            | C, C++, Rust, Swift <br> `quotRem` in Haskell | `//` and `%` in Python <br> `/` in Python 2 only <br> `divMod` in Haskell | None? |

The cells marked :+1: suggest generally desirable properties. For further
reading, see
[this Microsoft Research paper](http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/151917/divmodnote-letter.pdf).

Our options here are as follows:

-   Pick one of the two interpretations as the meaning of `/`, and (optionally)
    pick one of the above interpretations as the meaning of `%`); perhaps
    provide the others as library functions or as additional operators.
-   Do not provide any of these operators for integers and provide only named
    functions.

Note that we are not required to provide a `%` that is consistent with our
chosen `/` operator. (We could pick truncate-towards-zero for `/` and
truncate-towards-negative-infinity for `%`, for example.) There is
long-established tradition here, but it's unclear to what extent practicing
programmers really care about the relationship between `/` and `%`.

It is likely that most Carbon code that performs division and modulo between
signed integer types does not actually care about what happens when either
operand is negative. Therefore, following our goals of supporting
high-performance code and current CPU architectures, we will choose to implement
`/` and `%` as division with truncation towards zero. The other variants can be
provided by a library function, if at all.

[1]: That is: for positive divisors, round towards negative infinity; for
negative divisors, round towards positive infinity.

[2]: Here, `sign(a)` is 1 if `a >= 0` and is -1 if `a < 0`.

### Use different precedence groups for division and multiplication

Under this proposal, division and multiplication are in the same precedence
group, and are left-associative: `a * b / c * d` is `((a * b) / c) / d`, and not
`(a * b) / (c * d)` or some other grouping.

It's not feasible to provide a different interpretation here due to the risk of
confusing developers migrating from other languages. However, we could reject
such expressions and require explicit parentheses.

While the value of accepting code such as this is relatively low, the fact that
both existing programming languages and common mathematical education treat
multiplication and division as the same, left-associative, precedence group
means that it's unlikely to be a significant burden to expect Carbon developers
to remember this precedence rule.

### Use the same precedence group for modulo and multiplication

In most languages with the set of arithmetic operators discussed in this
proposal, `%` is considered a multiplicative operator, and so a sequence of `*`,
`/`, and `%` operators is processed left-to-right. In some sense this is
reasonable: `%` is notionally performing a division, after all. Moreover, in a
code search, I was unable to find evidence that it's common for precedence
errors with `%` to be checked in to source control, and C++ compilers don't have
warnings for mixing `%` with `+` without parentheses.

Giving `%` and `/` the same precedence also allows some kinds of code to be
written symmetrically:

```c++
char two_digit_number[] = {
  '0' + m / 10,
  '0' + m % 10,
  0
};
char four_digit_number[] = {
  '0' + n / 1000,
  '0' + n / 100 % 10,
  '0' + n / 10 % 10,
  '0' + n % 10,
  0
};
```

With minimal parentheses, that example would be written as follows under this
proposal:

```carbon
var two_digit_number: Array(Char, 3) = (
  '0' + m / 10,
  '0' + (m % 10),
  0
);
var four_digit_number: Array(Char, 5) = (
  '0' + n / 1000,
  '0' + ((n / 100) % 10),
  '0' + ((n / 10) % 10),
  '0' + (n % 10),
  0
);
```

We could use the same precedence rule as other languages, and permit examples
similar to the above to be written without any parentheses.

However, our [rule for precedence](p0555.md#when-to-add-precedence-edges) is:

> For every combination of operators, either it should be reasonable to expect
> most or all developers who regularly use Carbon to reliably remember the
> precedence, or there should not be a precedence rule.

It is not clear that a precedence rule that gives a defined meaning to, for
example, `a + b % c + d` would satisfy this rule. Moreover, in mathematics, the
"mod" operator generally binds very loosely: in 'n = m + 1 (mod 5)', the '(mod
5)' applies to the entire equality, certainly not to the '1'.

Therefore, we do not give modulo higher precedence than addition, and require
parentheses when mixing the two. This decision should be revisited if it is a
significant source of friction in practice.

### Use a different spelling for modulo

We could use a different spelling for the modulo operation. For example, we
could spell it as `mod`.

Advantages:

-   The percent sign has no relation to modulo or remainder. The only known
    justification for this particular choice of symbol is that it resembles the
    '÷' symbol; however, that symbol means division, not remainder.
-   Would free up the `%` symbol for other uses that may be more prevalent than
    modulo. However, we would need to be cautious when adding any alternative
    uses to avoid confusion for people who expect `%` to mean modulo.

Disadvantages:

-   This would be unfamiliar to developers coming from C++ and other languages
    with similar operator sets.
-   There is no other common established symbol for this operation. Using a
    keyword such as `mod` would break our loose convention of using keywords for
    non-overloadable operators and operator symbols for overloadable operators.
    Using a function would substantially increase the verbosity of certain kinds
    of code.

## Future work

### Provide separate wrapping operators

We could provide distinct operators with wrapping semantics for types where
overflow is normally a programming error. For example, Swift provides
[overflow operators](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/AdvancedOperators.html#ID37)
`&+`, `&-`, and `&*` for this purpose.

This proposal takes no position on whether this would be useful. However, given
that in this proposal, unsigned types already have wrapping semantics, the
pressure to provide operators for signed types with those semantics is somewhat
reduced.

### Provide separate operations to detect overflow

It would be useful to provide a way to perform an arithmetic operation if
possible, and to provide a separate codepath to handle the case where the
arithmetic would have overflowed. For example, we could imagine the Carbon
standard library providing a facility such as:

```
fn AddWithOverflow[N:! BigInt](a: Integer(N), b: Integer(N)) -> Optional(Integer(N));
```

While this would undoubtedly be useful, this proposal provides no facility for
this operation.
