# Make the Carbon experiment public

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1315)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
    -   [Why go public now?](#why-go-public-now)
    -   [Planned process for going public](#planned-process-for-going-public)
        -   [Public site and communications plan](#public-site-and-communications-plan)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Delay going public until we have working interop demonstrated](#delay-going-public-until-we-have-working-interop-demonstrated)
    -   [Delay going public until Carbon is a compelling option for C++ developers to adopt](#delay-going-public-until-carbon-is-a-compelling-option-for-c-developers-to-adopt)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

Open, transparent, and public development is often the best way to build a
developer community. Long-term evolution of Carbon behind closed doors does not
align with our core principles.

While early exploration with a limited group of participants has been effective
at bootstrapping, a primary goal for the Carbon experiment is to establish
whether there will be **broad industry interest and participation** in this
direction. We expect this kind of interest and participation to ultimately
result in widespread adoption if the technical components of the experiment
succeed. We both want to see how the industry reacts to Carbon and think that
reaction will be much more positive if the industry can actively participate and
help shape the language.

## Background

Historically, Carbon has followed a "quiet" development model. While developed
on GitHub using an open source process, the project was not publicly visible or
discussed outside the invited set of early participants.

Carbon developed an initial set of criteria that we expected to signal the
correct time for the project to become public:

-   Broader field experience required
-   Sustained interest from multiple organizations and individuals
-   A prototype implementation
-   A demonstration of potential
-   Learning material
-   Prepared for broader contributions and feedback
-   Prepared for a launch event

See the removed `going_public.md` document in this
[proposal](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1315) for the
full historical criteria and analysis.

## Proposal

We should make the Carbon experiment public as soon as reasonably possible,
specifically at the upcoming [C++ North](https://cppnorth.ca) conference.

Many of the criteria outlined previously have not yet been met, and this
proposal specifically suggests shifting Carbon to be public without waiting for
them. Instead, we should make Carbon public largely as it is today. We should be
open and transparent about the current status. We should frame this as making a
_nascent_ project public in order to _build it in the open_, rather than
suggesting it is "done" or "ready" even for evaluation.

### Why go public now?

There is no perfect time to shift the project public, it is a tradeoff. The
earlier we move the project to be public, the earlier we can gain more broad
feedback and participation from the industry. However, it comes at the cost of
introducing people to the project at an earlier stage with less material to help
them get started. We believe Carbon has crossed the point where this tradeoff
suggests sooner would be overall better for the project than later.

**The Carbon experiment has accomplished what it can** to explore industry
interest and participation with limited and targeted outreach to experts. We
have built the critical community and design process and framework to support an
open technical discussion. We have also developed the key language design ideas
sufficiently to show what Carbon would look like clearly and unambiguously. To
broaden or deepen the feedback, we will need frank and public discussion with
wider groups of users and stakeholders. We will need to iterate with a larger
community and a broader set of stakeholders.

**The needs of the C++ community remain unmet, and they are eager** and asking
for exactly Carbon's approach. The technical approach of Carbon directly
addresses concrete and current requests from influential C++ developers. These
needs are specifically not met by C or C++ as they exist or by Rust or other
options, and we have a strategic opportunity to help drive a solution in this
space.

A recent example on Twitter:

> Speaking as a C/C++ developer, when I write in C/C++, I am doing so due to
> ecosystem/practical/legacy code constraints I have no control over, which
> means that being given a superior choice makes no difference to me because I
> didn't get a chance to choose C/C++ to start with
>
> -- [@mcclure111](https://twitter.com/mcclure111/status/1484987221136580610)

A recent HackerNews discussion directly suggested essentially the direction we
are exploring:

> The permanent-ABI compatibility decision was effectively the death-knell for
> C++. Can't improve the standard library performance, making it effectively
> useless for the real world. Can't correct mistakes - the language and library
> warts grow and grow as the years pass by, making it impossible for beginners
> to pick up and learn the language.
>
> -- [lenkite](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=31227269)

Last but not least, **the Carbon experiment will accelerate thinking about more
dramatic ways to improve C++ across the industry**.

### Planned process for going public

Our planned process is anchored around a few key principles:

-   Replicate LLVM's open-source approach and strategy. This has proven broadly
    successful over many years.
-   Use existing events and spaces where possible to engage with the C++
    community and industry.
-   Emphasize that it's an experiment, not a finished product.
-   Leverage existing C++ ecosystems rather than creating new ecosystems from
    scratch.

We expect three phases to move things to be public:

-   Get technical components ready: demo, documentation, etc.
-   Do an incremental "road show" with experts, organizations, and WG21 in weeks
    leading up to an official public announcement to seed early awareness.
-   Announce and make everything public at C++North.

During the second phase, we plan to engage with the following individuals and
groups:

-   Industry partners already active in C++ evolution.
-   Influential experts, especially those actively driving C++ evolution and
    prominently writing blog posts or speaking on C++.
-   Community organizations like #include <C++> and Boost.

Our intent is to invite large portions of these groups to join community spaces
to help engage and establish the community culture.

The third phase will be oriented around a keynote at CppNorth:

-   Introduce the audience to the motivation for Carbon and its goals.
-   Explain the project, community, and process.
-   Walk through the core language design so far, and touch on exciting future
    efforts.
-   Provide an extended Q&A to help kick off active discussions, ideally with as
    many of the current Carbon contributors on stage as possible.
-   Will open the GitHub project _read_ ACLs either right before or during the
    talk so that the audience can explore during the Q&A and afterward.
-   Will open the _contribution_ ACLs and Discord Chat at the _end_ so that the
    maximum team bandwidth is available to engage with folks as they begin
    discussing.

#### Public site and communications plan

-   Planning to use a GitHub project and GitHub hosted markdown documentation.
-   Work with existing C++ community blogs to post information about the project
    after announcement.

We are specifically not planning on a website, blog, or other more "official"
presence. This should anchor on Carbon being an experiment and attracting
contributors and participants rather than users.

#### Plan for ACLs once public

GitHub will move to the normal for a public repository:

-   Anyone can create PRs, issues, discussions. This will be fully public.
-   A fairly small number of committers (initially the current set) who can
    merge PRs.

Discord will be fully public, using the community features to gate entry on CoC
and CLA.

The shared Google drive and docs:

-   Make viewable publicly.
-   Use the existing group (carbon-lang-contributors@googlegroups.com) to
    provide comment and edit access.
-   New contributors will need to request to join the group to begin
    contributing in this space, but only to avoid spam. This will be a very
    low-risk and trivially handed out access.

Meetings and calendar:

-   As currently, the meeting links would be posted to Discord and anyone there
    can click through and join.
-   The shared calendar and weekly meeting can also be directly made available
    to the same group as the drive.
-   In the future, we can explore enabling live-streaming from the weekly
    meeting and providing a fully public live stream link for those interested.

## Rationale

-   [Community and culture](/docs/project/goals.md#community-and-culture)
    -   Becoming a fully open project has always been a goal for the project.
    -   Moving public will substantially broaden the feedback we get,
        strengthening our community and directly furthering our goal of being an
        welcoming and inclusive community.
-   [Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)
    -   We need to ensure we can actively engage with users of different C++
        codebases to effectively build a compelling interoperability and
        migration story. This kind of broad engagement is only possible with a
        public project.

## Alternatives considered

### Delay going public until we have working interop demonstrated

An appealing time to go public would be when we have a toolchain that implements
the core language design _and_ provides a demonstration of the banner feature of
Carbon -- C++ interop -- working effectively. This is expected to take on the
order of a year to complete.

Advantages:

-   Make the project much more "real" when people first learn of it, and avoid
    the perception of it being vaporware.
-   Avoids spending significant time and effort engaging with a large community
    and industry when the project is new and small. That effort could be
    directed at furthering the design and implementation.

Disadvantages:

-   It would be difficult or impossible to expand the group working on Carbon
    significantly, which will at some point limit the rate at which we can
    execute on the project.
-   We would be have significantly less broad input on the design of Carbon
    itself and especially of its C++ interop, risking that the design would not
    actually address the needs of the broader industry.
-   We wouldn't be able to build Carbon in the open and develop trust of the
    community and industry.
-   We wouldn't be able to involve the broader community and industry in the
    design and development of Carbon, which might lessen both interest and
    enthusiasm.
-   We won't start to understand how broadly the industry is interested in the
    Carbon direction until significantly more effort has been invested.

The desire to build Carbon in the open, develop strong trust with the community,
and understand the breadth of industry interest outweigh the costs and risks of
making Carbon public earlier.

### Delay going public until Carbon is a compelling option for C++ developers to adopt

We could delay still further and build Carbon into a compelling and ready-to-use
programming language before going public.

Advantages:

-   This would in some ways be the most _efficient_ strategy, as it would keep
    everyone working on Carbon focused without distraction.
-   We would have the best possible first impression on developers by having a
    largely complete and high quality language ready to go.

Disadvantages:

-   We still wouldn't know whether the experiment was a success -- both
    developers and the industry at large might not be interested in Carbon. The
    result is that this would have the maximum sunk cost at the point where we
    begin to learn about the industry interest.
-   It is unlikely we could sustain the effort required to reach this point
    without any incremental milestones.
-   We would likely have very little trust from the community due the prolonged
    secrecy.
-   Given the timeline, it is very likely that Carbon would leak and lose some
    of the advantages.
-   This would maximize the risk of some aspect of Carbon being designed in a
    way that doesn't meet the larger industry needs due to a lack of feedback.
    It also maximizes the cost of correcting this once discovered.

This has never been seen as a realistic approach for Carbon, and that doesn't
seem to have changed. While it does have some advantages, the tradeoff seems
sharply wrong for the needs of the Carbon project.
