# Introduce `var`/`let`-`else`-statement

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1871)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
-   [Unresolved questions](#unresolved-questions)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

This statement is syntactic sugar for a set of other patterns, specifically it
guards a code block if a requirement of this code block is violated. That is,
there is actually no problem.

## Background

The idea goes back to the prior art in
[Swift](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/ControlFlow.html#ID525)
to allow the execution of a statement depending on the Boolean value of an
expression. Swift used a **guard** statement to require that a condition must be
true in order for all following code in the current code block to be executed.
If the condition is not true, control needs to be transferred using a control
transfer statement as `break`, `continue`, `return`, or a function that does not
return.

[Rust](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/3137-let-else.md)
followed suit and introduced the **let-else statement**:

```rust
let PATTERN: TYPE = EXPRESSION else DIVERGING_BLOCK;
```

as a more or less natural counterpart to its
[if-let expression](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/0160-if-let.md).

This proposal adds this pattern as it seems to be rather popular and simplifies
common error-handling patterns.

## Proposal

A `let` or `var` declaration may be used with a
[refutable pattern](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/docs/design/README.md#refutable-patterns)
if an `else` clause is supplied, as in:

```carbon
let (x: i32, true) = F(1) else {
  // Can't use `x` here.
  return false;
}
// `x` is an r-value
var (y: i32, true) = F(x) else {
  return false;
}
// `y` is an l-value
y += 2;
```

If the pattern successfully matches the runtime value, values are bound
according to the pattern, and execution skips over the `else` code block and
proceeds to the next statement.

If the pattern does not match, the `else` code block will be executed. None of
the bindings from the pattern will be in scope in the `else` code block. No
control flow path in the `else` code block may continue to the statement after.
All paths must end with a `break`, `continue`, `return`, or call to a function
that never returns.

## Details

TBD after enough C in this RFC.

## Rationale

This pattern is said to improve the readability of code, compared to an
equivalent `match` or `if` statement. It allows to keep code which handles
violated requirements next to the requirements.

## Alternatives considered

-   `var`/`let` ... `or {...}`
-   `var`/`let` ... `?: {...}` a short-circuited ternary operator
-   `var`/`let` ... `otherwise {...}`
-   introducer syntax: `guard var`/`let` ... `else {...}`

## Unresolved questions

-   How often is this pattern actually used?
-   Is it really more readable?
