# Defining the 0.1 language

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/2759)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Abstract](#abstract)
-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

Provides a clear definition of our goals for the 0.1 Carbon language, and a
concrete feature-set that is expected to satisfy these goals.

The high level goal proposed for the 0.1 language is to reach an evaluation-MVP
(Minimal Viable Product): it should be sufficiently complete to evaluate its
suitability specifically with respect to fitness as a C++ successor language.

The features proposed for 0.1 language in turn focus on C++ interoperability and
a minimal subset of foundational aspects of the language.

Beyond the language itself, the other project features and milestones proposed
focus on enabling evaluation of the language design and interoperating with C++
in practice.

## Problem

The initial set of concrete goals for the Carbon project have focused on
establishing the project itself (governance, evolution, community,
infrastructure, etc.) and exploratory work on both the language design and
implementation.

The project is now reasonably healthy and executing effectively in the open, and
we've made enough exploratory progress on both design and implementation that we
need to pick a much more specific target to prioritize further work effectively.

The obvious next goal, as outlined in our 2023 roadmap, is to prepare Carbon for
detailed and in-depth evaluation by potential users to see if it could
potentially meet their needs for a C++ successor language. While some aspects of
our potential value proposition can be considered abstractly, many of the hard
questions around "will it work with my code?" and "how well will it work?" need
direct evaluation to gain confidence.

We need to prioritize a specific set of features and milestones that are
sufficient for this evaluation. Once this 0.1 language is "done" we can start
advocating for in-depth evaluation.

## Background

-   [Carbon's 2023 roadmap](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/docs/project/roadmap.md)

## Proposal

We suggest a set of initial milestones for the Carbon project with version
numbers to make them easy to talk about. For each milestone, we try to outline
what the theme is, provide some concrete goals that should be addressed, and a
list of concrete features we expect to be complete.

While the proposal only suggests three milestones initially, it isn't precluding
adding additional milestones when and where they make sense as the project
progresses.

This proposal is suggesting a concrete and near-complete set of features for the
first milestone. While this list may be updated based on new information, we are
reasonably confident in its completeness. However, subsequent milestones are
intentionally left incomplete and open-ended. They will be filled in as they get
closer. The intent in having them here is to allow us to explicitly defer things
to later milestones without leaving them out entirely in cases where there is
specific interest in knowing when a major feature is expected.

**Summary of proposed milestones:**

-   "0.1" -- the MVP (Minimum Viable Product) language for the _evaluation_ of
    Carbon by C++ community and developers.
-   "0.2" -- feature complete for evaluating and concluding the experiment
-   "1.0" -- the result of a successful experiment and production-ready

One important detail is that a core goal of Carbon is to be a language prepared
for on-going evolution. This means that even if Carbon gets to 1.0, that isn't
expected to be a _final_ version in any sense, nor is any version expected to be
final. Carbon should continue to evolve and develop going forward. As it gains
users, that evolution will have to be carefully managed to be easily adopted.
Eventually, there might be LTS (Long Term Stable) releases to help cover a wide
range of stability needs. All of this is part of the _actual_ requirement for
1.0: a concrete evolution strategy for Carbon.

## Carbon Milestones

**Note: this will be a stand-alone document in /docs/project/milestones.md once
in a PR.**

As Carbon progresses, we want to have some common long-term milestones that we
orient our work around. The annual roadmap provides a specific and immediate set
of priorities for the year, but we want successive years to point in a coherent
direction with meaningful end goals. Milestones should typically be long-term,
spanning more than a year, and have some functional motivation.

We also assign version numbers to our initial milestones to make them easy to
refer to and incorporate into various versioning schemes.

### Milestone 0.1: a minimum viable product (MVP) for evaluation

The first milestone is also the most concrete -- it is the MVP for C++ users and
developers to begin evaluating Carbon seriously. We want to keep this milestone
as minimal as we can while still enabling a sufficient initial round of
evaluation.

#### Goals

From the perspective of outcomes, our goals for the 0.1 language are centered
around what we expect evaluations to be able to include:

-   Language design components are documented, cohesive, and understandable by
    evaluators without placeholders.
    -   The components and language features must include the foundational core
        of the language. These features must also be sufficient to translate
        existing C++ code (not using coroutines) into obvious and unsurprising
        Carbon code.
    -   Also in-scope are additional features that impact API design or need
        early feedback, but only if they are low cost to both the design and
        implementation.
    -   Example language components for this are: lexical structure,
        expressions, statements, conditions, loops, user-defined types,
        dependencies.
    -   Example library components are integer types, floating point types,
        strings, arrays, ranges, pointers, optionals, variants, heap allocation,
        etc.
    -   Where these build on top of other language or library designs, those are
        transitively in-scope.
-   Design for both Carbon use of C++ and C++ use of Carbon, including all major
    C++ language features except for coroutines, is documented, cohesive, and
    understandable by evaluators without placeholders.
-   Evaluators can build and run tests of most C++ interoperability, including
    both real-world C++ code that can be built with the latest release of Clang
    and test Carbon code.
    -   Gaps from the design need to be ones that don't undermine evaluation
        confidence.
-   Evaluators can effectively stress-test build speed and scaling with Carbon.
-   Evaluators can build some key benchmarks that include C++ interoperation in
    the critical path and get representative performance results.
    -   This can in turn be a still smaller subset of all aspects of C++
        interoperability based around what impacts interest benchmarks.

#### Features

These are focused on the core _necessary_ features for us to reach a successful
0.1 language that can address our goals. Some of these features are required
directly by the above goals, others are required due to dependencies or
interactions with the directly required features. However, we don't try to cover
all of the features in full granularity here. There will be many minor
components that are necessary for these to hold together but are not directly
addressed. In general, unless something is explicitly described as partial or
having exceptions, everything covered by that entry should be expected in the
0.1 language.

Another important point is that this doesn't commit Carbon to any _particular_
design for any of these bullet points. Instead, it just means that the Carbon
design must have _something_ that addresses each of these bullet points. That
might be to add the named design to Carbon, but it equally might be a clear
statement that Carbon will _not_ include this design but use some other language
features to address its use cases and when rewriting C++ code using that feature
into Carbon.

##### Code organization and structuring

-   Packages
-   Libraries
-   Implementation files
-   Importing
-   Namespaces

##### Type system

-   User-defined types
    -   Single inheritance
        -   Virtual dispatch
    -   Operator overloading
    -   **Uncertain:** Mixins (depending on how much need there is to evaluate
        C++'s multiple inheritance use cases)
-   Generics
    -   Both generic functions and types
    -   Checked generics
        -   Definition-checked variadics
    -   Integrated templates
        -   "Template interfaces" and named predicates
-   Sum types

##### Functions, statements, expressions, ...

-   Functions
    -   Separate declaration and definition
    -   Function overloading
-   Control flow statements
    -   Conditions
    -   Loops
        -   Range-based loops
        -   Good equivalents for a range of existing C/C++ looping constructs
        -   (maybe? hard to justify) Labeled-break and complex loop support
    -   Match (someth
-   Interoperation with C++ threading and atomic primitives
-   Error handling

### Milestone 0.2: feature complete product for evaluation

The second milestone already concretely in mind is reaching a level of
feature-completeness. The completeness metric here is based around the features
necessary to credibly address the _existing_ needs of C++ users and developers
interested in moving to Carbon, and so will be heavily driven by either features
already in use in C++ or necessary features to make moving off of C++ a viable
tradeoff. Carbon will continue to evolve and grow features beyond this, but at
this point there shouldn't be any feature gaps that are problematic for the
initial target audience coming from C++, and we should be able to finalize the
Carbon _experiment_ with this feature set.

That said, this is about as concrete as we can get for a milestone that remains
years in the future. The full scope of requirements for this milestone will be
defined as we complete 0.1 and begin getting feedback on it. Currently, we just
call out specific features that we are actively deferring until 0.2 but without
being listed somewhere could cause confusion.

#### Features explicitly deferred until at least 0.2

-   Memory safety
-   Coroutines, async, generators, etc.
-   Comprehensive story for handling effects, and how functions can be generic
    across effects
-   Carbon-native threading
-   Long tail of metaprogramming features
-   Inline assembly
-   SIMD
-   Some ability to define an API that communicates & shares data across
    language versions, build configurations, and other FFI or ABI boundaries.
-   Necessary parts of the standard library

### Milestone 1.0: no longer an experiment, usable in production

Even less concrete is the milestone that marks Carbon no longer being an
experiment, but if successful, a usable language. Currently this is
speculatively called 1.0 but even that is highly subject to change as we
approach. Again, we simply call out features here that we want to explicitly
defer and not cause confusion by omission above.

#### Features explicitly deferred beyond 0.2

-   Complete language evolution story
-   Package management story
-   High quality developer experience, ranging from compiler error messages to
    development tooling
-   Everything we've learned we need as part of the evaluation of 0.1 and 0.2
-

## Rationale

TODO: How does this proposal effectively advance Carbon's goals? Rather than
re-stating the full motivation, this should connect that motivation back to
Carbon's stated goals and principles. This may evolve during review. Use links
to appropriate sections of [`/docs/project/goals.md`](/docs/project/goals.md),
and/or to documents in [`/docs/project/principles`](/docs/project/principles).
For example:

-   [Community and culture](/docs/project/goals.md#community-and-culture)
-   [Language tools and ecosystem](/docs/project/goals.md#language-tools-and-ecosystem)
-   [Performance-critical software](/docs/project/goals.md#performance-critical-software)
-   [Software and language evolution](/docs/project/goals.md#software-and-language-evolution)
-   [Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
-   [Practical safety and testing mechanisms](/docs/project/goals.md#practical-safety-and-testing-mechanisms)
-   [Fast and scalable development](/docs/project/goals.md#fast-and-scalable-development)
-   [Modern OS platforms, hardware architectures, and environments](/docs/project/goals.md#modern-os-platforms-hardware-architectures-and-environments)
-   [Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)

## Alternatives considered

What alternative solutions have you considered?

We break down the proposal into three parts: goals for 0.1, the 0.1 language,
and other milestones that will be important for the project as a whole to reach
0.1.
