
=pod

=head1 NAME

FileCheck - Flexible pattern matching file verifier

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<FileCheck> I<match-filename> [I<--check-prefix=XXX>] [I<--strict-whitespace>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<FileCheck> reads two files (one from standard input, and one specified on the
command line) and uses one to verify the other.  This behavior is particularly
useful for the testsuite, which wants to verify that the output of some tool
(e.g. llc) contains the expected information (for example, a movsd from esp or
whatever is interesting).  This is similar to using grep, but it is optimized
for matching multiple different inputs in one file in a specific order.

The I<match-filename> file specifies the file that contains the patterns to
match.  The file to verify is always read from standard input.

The input and output of B<tblgen> is beyond the scope of this short
introduction. Please see the I<TestingGuide> page in the LLVM documentation.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--help>

Print a summary of command line options.

=item B<--check-prefix> I<prefix>

FileCheck searches the contents of I<match-filename> for patterns to match.  By
default, these patterns are prefixed with "CHECK:".  If you'd like to use a
different prefix (e.g. because the same input file is checking multiple
different tool or options), the B<--check-prefix> argument allows you to specify
a specific prefix to match.

=item B<--strict-whitespace>

By default, FileCheck canonicalizes input horizontal whitespace (spaces and
tabs) which causes it to ignore these differences (a space will match a tab).
The --strict-whitespace argument disables this behavior.

=item B<-version>

Show the version number of this program.

=back

=head1 EXIT STATUS

If B<FileCheck> verifies that the file matches the expected contents, it exits
with 0.  Otherwise, if not, or if an error occurs, it will exit with a non-zero
value.

=head1 AUTHORS

Maintained by The LLVM Team (L<http://llvm.org>).

=cut
