=pod

=head1 NAME

llvm-build - LLVM Project Build Utility

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<llvm-build> [I<options>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<llvm-build> is a tool for working with LLVM projects that use the LLVMBuild
system for describing their components.

At heart, B<llvm-build> is responsible for loading, verifying, and manipulating
the project's component data. The tool is primarily designed for use in
implementing build systems and tools which need access to the project structure
information.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Print the builtin program help.

=item B<--source-root>=I<PATH>

If given, load the project at the given source root path. If this option is not
given, the location of the project sources will be inferred from the location of
the B<llvm-build> script itself.

=item B<--print-tree>

Print the component tree for the project.

=item B<--write-library-table>

Write out the C++ fragment which defines the components, library names, and
required libraries. This C++ fragment is built into L<llvm-config|llvm-config>
in order to provide clients with the list of required libraries for arbitrary
component combinations.

=item B<--write-llvmbuild>

Write out new I<LLVMBuild.txt> files based on the loaded components. This is
useful for auto-upgrading the schema of the files.

=item B<--write-make-fragment>

Write out the LLVMBuild in the form of a Makefile fragment, so it can easily be
consumed by a Make based build system. The exact contents and format of this
file are closely tied to how LLVMBuild is integrated with the Makefiles, see
LLVM's Makefile.rules.

=item B<--llvmbuild-source-root>=I<PATH>

If given, expect the I<LLVMBuild> files for the project to be rooted at the
given path, instead of inside the source tree itself. This option is primarily
designed for use in conjunction with B<--write-llvmbuild> to test changes to
I<LLVMBuild> schema.

=back

=head1 EXIT STATUS

B<llvm-build> exits with 0 if operation was successful. Otherwise, it will exist
with a non-zero value.

=head1 AUTHOR

Maintained by the LLVM Team (L<http://llvm.org/>).

=cut
