llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-objdump.rst, before:

llvm-objdump - LLVM's object file dumper
========================================

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llvm-objdump` [*commands*] [*options*] [*filenames...*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------
The :program:`llvm-objdump` utility prints the contents of object files and
final linked images named on the command line. If no file name is specified,
:program:`llvm-objdump` will attempt to read from *a.out*. If *-* is used as a
file name, :program:`llvm-objdump` will process a file on its standard input
stream.

COMMANDS
--------
At least one of the following commands are required, and some commands can be combined with other commands:

.. option:: -disassemble

  Display assembler mnemonics for the machine instructions
 
.. option:: -help

  Display usage information and exit. Does not stack with other commands.

.. option:: -r

  Display the relocation entries in the file.

.. option:: -s

  Display the content of each section.

.. option:: -section-headers

  Display summaries of the headers for each section.

.. option:: -t

  Display the symbol table.

.. option:: -version

  Display the version of this program. Does not stack with other commands.
  
OPTIONS
-------
:program:`llvm-objdump` supports the following options:

.. option:: -arch=<architecture>

  Specify the architecture to disassemble. see -version for available
  architectures.

.. option:: -cfg

  Create a CFG for every symbol in the object file and write it to a graphviz
  file (Mach-O-only).

.. option:: -dsym=<string>

  Use .dSYM file for debug info.

.. option:: -g

  Print line information from debug info if available.

.. option:: -macho

  Use Mach-O specific object file parser.

.. option:: -mattr=<a1,+a2,-a3,...>

  Target specific attributes.
  
.. option:: -mc-x86-disable-arith-relaxation

  Disable relaxation of arithmetic instruction for X86.

.. option:: -stats

  Enable statistics output from program.
  
.. option:: -triple=<string>

  Target triple to disassemble for, see -version for available targets.
  
.. option:: -x86-asm-syntax=<style>

  When used with the ``-disassemble`` option, choose style of code to emit from
  X86 backend. Supported values are:

   .. option:: att
   
    AT&T-style assembly
   
   .. option:: intel
   
    Intel-style assembly

   
  The default disassembly style is **att**. 

BUGS
----

To report bugs, please visit <http://llvm.org/bugs/>.

SEE ALSO
--------

:manpage:`llvm-nm(1)`

Commit message:

llvm-objdump -m -D should disassemble all text segments
Summary:
When running llvm-objdump with the -macho option objdump will by default
disassemble only the __TEXT,__text section (or __TEXT_EXEC,__text when
disassembling MH_KEXT_BUNDLE files). The -disassemble-all option is
treated no diferently than -disassemble.

This change upates llvm-objdump's MachO parsing code to disassemble all
__text sections found in a file when -disassemble-all is specified. This
is useful for disassembling files with more than one __text section, or
when disassembling files whose __text section is not present in __TEXT.

I added a lit test case that verifies "llvm-objdump -m -d" and 
"llvm-objdump -m -D" produce the expected results on a reference binary. 
I also updated the CommandGuide documentation for llvm-objdump.rst and
verified it renders correctly as man and html.

rdar://42899338

Reviewers: ab, pete, lhames

Reviewed By: lhames

Subscribers: rupprecht, llvm-commits

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D56649

llvm-svn: 351238

llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-objdump.rst, after:

llvm-objdump - LLVM's object file dumper
========================================

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llvm-objdump` [*commands*] [*options*] [*filenames...*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------
The :program:`llvm-objdump` utility prints the contents of object files and
final linked images named on the command line. If no file name is specified,
:program:`llvm-objdump` will attempt to read from *a.out*. If *-* is used as a
file name, :program:`llvm-objdump` will process a file on its standard input
stream.

COMMANDS
--------
At least one of the following commands are required, and some commands can be
combined with other commands:

.. option:: -d, -disassemble

  Display assembler mnemonics for the machine instructions. Disassembles all
  text sections found in the input file(s).

.. option:: -D, -disassemble-all

  Display assembler mnemonics for the machine instructions. Disassembles all
  sections found in the input file(s).

.. option:: -help

  Display usage information and exit. Does not stack with other commands.

.. option:: -r

  Display the relocation entries in the file.

.. option:: -s

  Display the content of each section.

.. option:: -section-headers

  Display summaries of the headers for each section.

.. option:: -t

  Display the symbol table.

.. option:: -version

  Display the version of this program. Does not stack with other commands.

OPTIONS
-------
:program:`llvm-objdump` supports the following options:

.. option:: -arch=<architecture>

  Specify the architecture to disassemble. see ``-version`` for available
  architectures.

.. option:: -cfg

  Create a CFG for every symbol in the object file and write it to a graphviz
  file (Mach-O-only).

.. option:: -dsym=<string>

  Use .dSYM file for debug info.

.. option:: -g

  Print line information from debug info if available.

.. option:: -m, -macho

  Use Mach-O specific object file parser. Commands and other options may behave
  differently when used with ``-macho``.

.. option:: -mattr=<a1,+a2,-a3,...>

  Target specific attributes.

.. option:: -mc-x86-disable-arith-relaxation

  Disable relaxation of arithmetic instruction for X86.

.. option:: -stats

  Enable statistics output from program.

.. option:: -triple=<string>

  Target triple to disassemble for, see ``-version`` for available targets.

.. option:: -x86-asm-syntax=<style>

  When used with the ``-disassemble`` option, choose style of code to emit from
  X86 backend. Supported values are:

   .. option:: att

    AT&T-style assembly

   .. option:: intel

    Intel-style assembly


  The default disassembly style is **att**.

BUGS
----

To report bugs, please visit <http://llvm.org/bugs/>.

SEE ALSO
--------

:manpage:`llvm-nm(1)`
