=pod

=head1 NAME

llvm-g++ - LLVM C++ front-end

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<llvm-g++> [I<options>] I<filename>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<llvm-g++> command is the LLVM C++ front end.  It is a modified
version of g++ that takes C++ programs and compiles them into LLVM
bytecode or assembly language, depending upon the options.

Unless the B<-S> option is specified, B<llvm-g++> will use the
L<gccas|gccas> program to perform some optimizations and create an
LLVM bytecode file. Unless the B<-c> option is specified, B<llvm-g++>
will also use the L<gccld|gccld> program to perform further
optimizations and link the resulting bytecode file(s) with support
libraries to create an executable program.

Being derived from the GNU Compiler Collection, B<llvm-g++> has many
of g++'s features and accepts most of g++'s options.  It handles a
number of g++'s extensions to the C++ programming language.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--help>

Print a summary of command line options.

=item B<-S>

Do not generate an LLVM bytecode file.  Rather, compile the source
file into an LLVM assembly language file.

=item B<-c>

Do not generate a linked executable.  Rather, compile the source
file into an LLVM bytecode file.  This bytecode file can then be
linked with other bytecode files later on to generate a full LLVM
executable.

=item B<-o> I<filename>

Specify the output file to be I<filename>.

=item B<-I> I<directory>

Add a directory to the header file search path.  This option can be
repeated.

=item B<-L> I<directory>

Add I<directory> to the library search path.  This option can be
repeated.

=item B<-l>I<name>

Link in the library libI<name>.[bc | a | so].  This library should
be a bytecode library.

=item B<-Wa,>I<option>

Pass I<option> to gccas

=item B<-Wl,>I<option>

Pass I<option> to gccld

=item B<-Wa,-disable-inlining -Wl,-disable-inlining>I<option>

Fully disable all inlining

=back

=head1 EXIT STATUS

If B<llvm-g++> succeeds, it will exit with 0.  Otherwise, if an error
occurs, it will exit with a non-zero value.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<llvm-gcc|llvmgcc>, L<gccas>, L<gccld>

=head1 AUTHORS

Maintained by the LLVM Team (L<http://llvm.cs.uiuc.edu>).

=cut

