llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-readobj.rst, before:

llvm-readobj - LLVM Object Reader
=================================

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llvm-readobj` [*options*] [*input...*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------

The :program:`llvm-readobj` tool displays low-level format-specific information
about one or more object files. The tool and its output is primarily designed
for use in FileCheck-based tests.

OPTIONS
-------

If ``input`` is "``-``" or omitted, :program:`llvm-readobj` reads from standard
input. Otherwise, it will read from the specified ``filenames``.

.. option:: -help

 Print a summary of command line options.

.. option:: -version

 Display the version of this program

.. option:: -file-headers, -h

 Display file headers.

.. option:: -sections, -s

 Display all sections.

.. option:: -section-data, -sd

 When used with ``-sections``, display section data for each section shown.

.. option:: -section-relocations, -sr

 When used with ``-sections``, display relocations for each section shown.

.. option:: -section-symbols, -st

 When used with ``-sections``, display symbols for each section shown.

.. option:: -relocations, -r

 Display the relocation entries in the file.

.. option:: -symbols, -t

 Display the symbol table.

.. option:: -dyn-symbols

 Display the dynamic symbol table (only for ELF object files).

.. option:: -unwind, -u

 Display unwind information.

.. option:: -expand-relocs

 When used with ``-relocations``, display each relocation in an expanded
 multi-line format.

.. option:: -dynamic-table

 Display the ELF .dynamic section table (only for ELF object files).

.. option:: -needed-libs

 Display the needed libraries (only for ELF object files).

.. option:: -program-headers

 Display the ELF program headers (only for ELF object files).

.. option:: -elf-section-groups, -g

 Display section groups (only for ELF object files).

EXIT STATUS
-----------

:program:`llvm-readobj` returns 0.

Commit message:

[llvm-readobj][ELF]Add demangling support
This change adds demangling support to the ELF side of llvm-readobj,
under the switch --demangle/-C.

The following places are demangled: symbol table dumps (static and
dynamic), relocation dumps (static and dynamic), addrsig dumps, call
graph profile dumps, and group section signature symbols.

Although GNU readelf doesn't support demangling, it is still a useful
feature to have, and brings it on a par with llvm-objdump's
capabilities.

This fixes https://bugs.llvm.org/show_bug.cgi?id=40054.

Reviewed by: grimar, rupprecht

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D56791

llvm-svn: 351450

llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-readobj.rst, after:

llvm-readobj - LLVM Object Reader
=================================

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llvm-readobj` [*options*] [*input...*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------

The :program:`llvm-readobj` tool displays low-level format-specific information
about one or more object files. The tool and its output is primarily designed
for use in FileCheck-based tests.

OPTIONS
-------

If ``input`` is "``-``" or omitted, :program:`llvm-readobj` reads from standard
input. Otherwise, it will read from the specified ``filenames``.

.. option:: -help

 Print a summary of command line options.

.. option:: -version

 Display the version of this program

.. option:: -file-headers, -h

 Display file headers.

.. option:: -sections, -s

 Display all sections.

.. option:: -section-data, -sd

 When used with ``-sections``, display section data for each section shown.

.. option:: -section-relocations, -sr

 When used with ``-sections``, display relocations for each section shown.

.. option:: -section-symbols, -st

 When used with ``-sections``, display symbols for each section shown.

.. option:: -relocations, -r

 Display the relocation entries in the file.

.. option:: -symbols, -t

 Display the symbol table.

.. option:: -dyn-symbols

 Display the dynamic symbol table (only for ELF object files).

.. option:: -unwind, -u

 Display unwind information.

.. option:: -expand-relocs

 When used with ``-relocations``, display each relocation in an expanded
 multi-line format.

.. option:: -dynamic-table

 Display the ELF .dynamic section table (only for ELF object files).

.. option:: -needed-libs

 Display the needed libraries (only for ELF object files).

.. option:: -program-headers

 Display the ELF program headers (only for ELF object files).

.. option:: -elf-section-groups, -g

 Display section groups (only for ELF object files).

.. option:: -demangle, -C

 Print demangled symbol names in the output.

EXIT STATUS
-----------

:program:`llvm-readobj` returns 0.
