=pod

=head1 NAME

llvm-abcd - bytecode file low-level dumper

=head1 SYNOPSIS

llvm-abcd [options] [filename]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<llvm-abcd> command is a small utility for analyzing bytecode files. The
B<abcd> acronym stands for B<a>nalysis of B<b>yteB<c>ode B<d>isplayer. The tool
reads a bytecode file (such as generated with the B<llvm-as> tool) and produces
statistical and low level bytecode format dumps. This tool is probably not of
much interest or utility except for those working directly with the bytecode
format. Most LLVM users can just ignore this tool.

If filename is omitted or is I<->, then B<llvm-abcd> reads its input from 
standard input. This is useful for combining B<llvm-abcd> in a pipeline.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--nodetails>

Causes B<llvm-abcd> to abbreviate its output by writing out only a module level
summary. The details for individual functions are not displayed.

=item B<--dump>

Causes B<llvm-abcd> to dump the bytecode in a human readable format. This format
is significantly different from LLVM assembly and provides details about the
encoding of the bytecode file.

=item B<--verify>

Causes B<llvm-abcd> to verify the module produced by by reading the bytecode.
This ensures that the statistics generated are reliable.

=item B<--help>

Print a summary of command line options. 

=back

=head1 EXIT STATUS

If B<llvm-abcd> succeeds, it will exit with zero exit status.  Otherwise, if an
error occurs, it will exit with a non-zero exit status, usually 1.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<llvm-dis>, L<LLVM Bytecode File Format|../docs/BytecodeFormat.html>

=head1 AUTHOR

Maintained by L<rspencer@x10sys.com|Reid Spencer>. 

=cut

