libcxx/docs/BuildingLibcxx.rst, before:

.. _BuildingLibcxx:

===============
Building libc++
===============

.. contents::
  :local:

.. _build instructions:

Getting Started
===============

On Mac OS 10.7 (Lion) and later, the easiest way to get this library is to install
Xcode 4.2 or later.  However if you want to install tip-of-trunk from here
(getting the bleeding edge), read on.

The basic steps needed to build libc++ are:

#. Checkout LLVM:

   * ``cd where-you-want-llvm-to-live``
   * ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/llvm/trunk llvm``

#. Checkout libc++:

   * ``cd where-you-want-llvm-to-live``
   * ``cd llvm/projects``
   * ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/libcxx/trunk libcxx``

#. Checkout libc++abi:

   * ``cd where-you-want-llvm-to-live``
   * ``cd llvm/projects``
   * ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/libcxxabi/trunk libcxxabi``

#. Configure and build libc++ with libc++abi:

   CMake is the only supported configuration system.

   Clang is the preferred compiler when building and using libc++.

   * ``cd where you want to build llvm``
   * ``mkdir build``
   * ``cd build``
   * ``cmake -G <generator> [options] <path to llvm sources>``

   For more information about configuring libc++ see :ref:`CMake Options`.

   * ``make cxx`` --- will build libc++ and libc++abi.
   * ``make check-cxx check-cxxabi`` --- will run the test suites.

   Shared libraries for libc++ and libc++ abi should now be present in llvm/build/lib.
   See :ref:`using an alternate libc++ installation <alternate libcxx>`

#. **Optional**: Install libc++ and libc++abi

   If your system already provides a libc++ installation it is important to be
   careful not to replace it. Remember Use the CMake option ``CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX`` to
   select a safe place to install libc++.

   * ``make install-cxx install-cxxabi`` --- Will install the libraries and the headers

   .. warning::
     * Replacing your systems libc++ installation could render the system non-functional.
     * Mac OS X will not boot without a valid copy of ``libc++.1.dylib`` in ``/usr/lib``.


The instructions are for building libc++ on
FreeBSD, Linux, or Mac using `libc++abi`_ as the C++ ABI library.
On Linux, it is also possible to use :ref:`libsupc++ <libsupcxx>` or libcxxrt.

It is sometimes beneficial to build outside of the LLVM tree. An out-of-tree
build would look like this:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ cd where-you-want-libcxx-to-live
  $ # Check out llvm, libc++ and libc++abi.
  $ ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/llvm/trunk llvm``
  $ ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/libcxx/trunk libcxx``
  $ ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/libcxxabi/trunk libcxxabi``
  $ cd where-you-want-to-build
  $ mkdir build && cd build
  $ export CC=clang CXX=clang++
  $ cmake -DLLVM_PATH=path/to/llvm \
          -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libcxxabi \
          -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS=path/to/libcxxabi/include \
          path/to/libcxx
  $ make
  $ make check-libcxx # optional


Experimental Support for Windows
--------------------------------

The Windows support requires building with clang-cl as cl does not support one
required extension: `#include_next`.  Furthermore, VS 2015 or newer (19.00) is
required.  In the case of clang-cl, we need to specify the "MS Compatibility
Version" as it defaults to 2014 (18.00).

CMake + Visual Studio
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Building with Visual Studio currently does not permit running tests. However,
it is the simplest way to build.

.. code-block:: batch

  > cmake -G "Visual Studio 14 2015"              ^
          -T "LLVM-vs2014"                        ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED=YES              ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC=NO               ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_LIBRARY=NO ^
          \path\to\libcxx
  > cmake --build .

CMake + ninja
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Building with ninja is required for development to enable tests.
Unfortunately, doing so requires additional configuration as we cannot
just specify a toolset.

.. code-block:: batch

  > cmake -G Ninja                                                                    ^
          -DCMAKE_MAKE_PROGRAM=/path/to/ninja                                         ^
          -DCMAKE_SYSTEM_NAME=Windows                                                 ^
          -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang-cl                                                 ^
          -DCMAKE_C_FLAGS="-fms-compatibility-version=19.00 --target=i686--windows"   ^
          -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang-cl                                                ^
          -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fms-compatibility-version=19.00 --target=i686--windows" ^
          -DLLVM_PATH=/path/to/llvm/tree                                              ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED=YES                                                  ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC=NO                                                   ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_LIBRARY=NO                                     ^
          \path\to\libcxx
  > /path/to/ninja cxx
  > /path/to/ninja check-cxx

Note that the paths specified with backward slashes must use the `\\` as the
directory separator as clang-cl may otherwise parse the path as an argument.

.. _`libc++abi`: http://libcxxabi.llvm.org/


.. _CMake Options:

CMake Options
=============

Here are some of the CMake variables that are used often, along with a
brief explanation and LLVM-specific notes. For full documentation, check the
CMake docs or execute ``cmake --help-variable VARIABLE_NAME``.

**CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE**:STRING
  Sets the build type for ``make`` based generators. Possible values are
  Release, Debug, RelWithDebInfo and MinSizeRel. On systems like Visual Studio
  the user sets the build type with the IDE settings.

**CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX**:PATH
  Path where LLVM will be installed if "make install" is invoked or the
  "INSTALL" target is built.

**CMAKE_CXX_COMPILER**:STRING
  The C++ compiler to use when building and testing libc++.


.. _libcxx-specific options:

libc++ specific options
-----------------------

.. option:: LIBCXX_INSTALL_LIBRARY:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Toggle the installation of the library portion of libc++.

.. option:: LIBCXX_INSTALL_HEADERS:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Toggle the installation of the libc++ headers.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build libc++ with assertions enabled.

.. option:: LIBCXX_BUILD_32_BITS:BOOL

  **Default**: ``OFF``

  Build libc++ as a 32 bit library. Also see `LLVM_BUILD_32_BITS`.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build libc++ as a shared library. Either `LIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED` or
  `LIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC` has to be enabled.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build libc++ as a static library. Either `LIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED` or
  `LIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC` has to be enabled.

.. option:: LIBCXX_LIBDIR_SUFFIX:STRING

  Extra suffix to append to the directory where libraries are to be installed.
  This option overrides `LLVM_LIBDIR_SUFFIX`.

.. option:: LIBCXX_INSTALL_PREFIX:STRING

  **Default**: ``""``

  Define libc++ destination prefix.

.. _libc++experimental options:

libc++experimental Specific Options
------------------------------------

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_LIBRARY:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build and test libc++experimental.a.

.. option:: LIBCXX_INSTALL_EXPERIMENTAL_LIBRARY:BOOL

  **Default**: ``LIBCXX_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_LIBRARY AND LIBCXX_INSTALL_LIBRARY``

  Install libc++experimental.a alongside libc++.


.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_FILESYSTEM:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build filesystem as a standalone library libc++fs.a.

.. option:: LIBCXX_INSTALL_FILESYSTEM_LIBRARY:BOOL

  **Default**: ``LIBCXX_ENABLE_FILESYSTEM AND LIBCXX_INSTALL_LIBRARY``

  Install libc++fs.a alongside libc++.

.. _ABI Library Specific Options:

ABI Library Specific Options
----------------------------

.. option:: LIBCXX_CXX_ABI:STRING

  **Values**: ``none``, ``libcxxabi``, ``libcxxrt``, ``libstdc++``, ``libsupc++``.

  Select the ABI library to build libc++ against.

.. option:: LIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS:PATHS

  Provide additional search paths for the ABI library headers.

.. option:: LIBCXX_CXX_ABI_LIBRARY_PATH:PATH

  Provide the path to the ABI library that libc++ should link against.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC_ABI_LIBRARY:BOOL

  **Default**: ``OFF``

  If this option is enabled, libc++ will try and link the selected ABI library
  statically.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_ABI_LINKER_SCRIPT:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON`` by default on UNIX platforms other than Apple unless
  'LIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC_ABI_LIBRARY' is ON. Otherwise the default value is ``OFF``.

  This option generate and installs a linker script as ``libc++.so`` which
  links the correct ABI library.

.. option:: LIBCXXABI_USE_LLVM_UNWINDER:BOOL

  **Default**: ``OFF``

  Build and use the LLVM unwinder. Note: This option can only be used when
  libc++abi is the C++ ABI library used.


libc++ Feature Options
----------------------

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_EXCEPTIONS:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build libc++ with exception support.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_RTTI:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build libc++ with run time type information.

.. option:: LIBCXX_INCLUDE_BENCHMARKS:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build the libc++ benchmark tests and the Google Benchmark library needed
  to support them.

.. option:: LIBCXX_BENCHMARK_TEST_ARGS:STRING

  **Default**: ``--benchmark_min_time=0.01``

  A semicolon list of arguments to pass when running the libc++ benchmarks using the
  ``check-cxx-benchmarks`` rule. By default we run the benchmarks for a very short amount of time,
  since the primary use of ``check-cxx-benchmarks`` is to get test and sanitizer coverage, not to
  get accurate measurements.

.. option:: LIBCXX_BENCHMARK_NATIVE_STDLIB:STRING

  **Default**:: ``""``

  **Values**:: ``libc++``, ``libstdc++``

  Build the libc++ benchmark tests and Google Benchmark library against the
  specified standard library on the platform. On linux this can be used to
  compare libc++ to libstdc++ by building the benchmark tests against both
  standard libraries.

.. option:: LIBCXX_BENCHMARK_NATIVE_GCC_TOOLCHAIN:STRING

  Use the specified GCC toolchain and standard library when building the native
  stdlib benchmark tests.

.. option:: LIBCXX_HIDE_FROM_ABI_PER_TU_BY_DEFAULT:BOOL

  **Default**: ``OFF``

  Pick the default for whether to constrain ABI-unstable symbols to
  each individual translation unit. This setting controls whether
  `_LIBCPP_HIDE_FROM_ABI_PER_TU_BY_DEFAULT` is defined by default --
  see the documentation of that macro for details.


libc++ ABI Feature Options
--------------------------

The following options allow building libc++ for a different ABI version.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ABI_VERSION:STRING

  **Default**: ``1``

  Defines the target ABI version of libc++.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ABI_UNSTABLE:BOOL

  **Default**: ``OFF``

  Build the "unstable" ABI version of libc++. Includes all ABI changing features
  on top of the current stable version.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ABI_NAMESPACE:STRING

  **Default**: ``__n`` where ``n`` is the current ABI version.

  This option defines the name of the inline ABI versioning namespace. It can be used for building
  custom versions of libc++ with unique symbol names in order to prevent conflicts or ODR issues
  with other libc++ versions.

  .. warning::
    When providing a custom namespace, it's the users responsibility to ensure the name won't cause
    conflicts with other names defined by libc++, both now and in the future. In particular, inline
    namespaces of the form ``__[0-9]+`` are strictly reserved by libc++ and may not be used by users.
    Doing otherwise could cause conflicts and hinder libc++ ABI evolution.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ABI_DEFINES:STRING

  **Default**: ``""``

  A semicolon-separated list of ABI macros to persist in the site config header.
  See ``include/__config`` for the list of ABI macros.

.. _LLVM-specific variables:

LLVM-specific options
---------------------

.. option:: LLVM_LIBDIR_SUFFIX:STRING

  Extra suffix to append to the directory where libraries are to be
  installed. On a 64-bit architecture, one could use ``-DLLVM_LIBDIR_SUFFIX=64``
  to install libraries to ``/usr/lib64``.

.. option:: LLVM_BUILD_32_BITS:BOOL

  Build 32-bits executables and libraries on 64-bits systems. This option is
  available only on some 64-bits unix systems. Defaults to OFF.

.. option:: LLVM_LIT_ARGS:STRING

  Arguments given to lit.  ``make check`` and ``make clang-test`` are affected.
  By default, ``'-sv --no-progress-bar'`` on Visual C++ and Xcode, ``'-sv'`` on
  others.


Using Alternate ABI libraries
=============================


.. _libsupcxx:

Using libsupc++ on Linux
------------------------

You will need libstdc++ in order to provide libsupc++.

Figure out where the libsupc++ headers are on your system. On Ubuntu this
is ``/usr/include/c++/<version>`` and ``/usr/include/c++/<version>/<target-triple>``

You can also figure this out by running

.. code-block:: bash

  $ echo | g++ -Wp,-v -x c++ - -fsyntax-only
  ignoring nonexistent directory "/usr/local/include/x86_64-linux-gnu"
  ignoring nonexistent directory "/usr/lib/gcc/x86_64-linux-gnu/4.7/../../../../x86_64-linux-gnu/include"
  #include "..." search starts here:
  #include &lt;...&gt; search starts here:
  /usr/include/c++/4.7
  /usr/include/c++/4.7/x86_64-linux-gnu
  /usr/include/c++/4.7/backward
  /usr/lib/gcc/x86_64-linux-gnu/4.7/include
  /usr/local/include
  /usr/lib/gcc/x86_64-linux-gnu/4.7/include-fixed
  /usr/include/x86_64-linux-gnu
  /usr/include
  End of search list.

Note that the first two entries happen to be what we are looking for. This
may not be correct on other platforms.

We can now run CMake:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ CC=clang CXX=clang++ cmake -G "Unix Makefiles" \
    -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libstdc++ \
    -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS="/usr/include/c++/4.7/;/usr/include/c++/4.7/x86_64-linux-gnu/" \
    -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr \
    <libc++-source-dir>


You can also substitute ``-DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libsupc++``
above, which will cause the library to be linked to libsupc++ instead
of libstdc++, but this is only recommended if you know that you will
never need to link against libstdc++ in the same executable as libc++.
GCC ships libsupc++ separately but only as a static library.  If a
program also needs to link against libstdc++, it will provide its
own copy of libsupc++ and this can lead to subtle problems.

.. code-block:: bash

  $ make cxx
  $ make install

You can now run clang with -stdlib=libc++.


.. _libcxxrt_ref:

Using libcxxrt on Linux
------------------------

You will need to keep the source tree of `libcxxrt`_ available
on your build machine and your copy of the libcxxrt shared library must
be placed where your linker will find it.

We can now run CMake like:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ CC=clang CXX=clang++ cmake -G "Unix Makefiles" \
          -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libcxxrt \
          -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS=path/to/libcxxrt-sources/src \
                -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
                -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr \
                <libc++-source-directory>
  $ make cxx
  $ make install

Unfortunately you can't simply run clang with "-stdlib=libc++" at this point, as
clang is set up to link for libc++ linked to libsupc++.  To get around this
you'll have to set up your linker yourself (or patch clang).  For example,

.. code-block:: bash

  $ clang++ -stdlib=libc++ helloworld.cpp \
            -nodefaultlibs -lc++ -lcxxrt -lm -lc -lgcc_s -lgcc

Alternately, you could just add libcxxrt to your libraries list, which in most
situations will give the same result:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ clang++ -stdlib=libc++ helloworld.cpp -lcxxrt

.. _`libcxxrt`: https://github.com/pathscale/libcxxrt/


Using a local ABI library installation
---------------------------------------

.. warning::
  This is not recommended in almost all cases.

These instructions should only be used when you can't install your ABI library.

Normally you must link libc++ against a ABI shared library that the
linker can find.  If you want to build and test libc++ against an ABI
library not in the linker's path you needq to set
``-DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_LIBRARY_PATH=/path/to/abi/lib`` when configuring CMake.

An example build using libc++abi would look like:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ CC=clang CXX=clang++ cmake \
              -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libc++abi  \
              -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS="/path/to/libcxxabi/include" \
              -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_LIBRARY_PATH="/path/to/libcxxabi-build/lib" \
               path/to/libcxx
  $ make

When testing libc++ LIT will automatically link against the proper ABI
library.

Commit message:

[libcxx] Support building hermetic static library
This is useful when static libc++ library is being linked into
shared libraries that may be used in combination with libraries.
We want to avoid we exporting libc++ symbols in those cases where
this option is useful. This is provided as a CMake option and can
be enabled by libc++ vendors as needed.

Differential Revision: https://reviews.llvm.org/D55404

llvm-svn: 350489

libcxx/docs/BuildingLibcxx.rst, after:

.. _BuildingLibcxx:

===============
Building libc++
===============

.. contents::
  :local:

.. _build instructions:

Getting Started
===============

On Mac OS 10.7 (Lion) and later, the easiest way to get this library is to install
Xcode 4.2 or later.  However if you want to install tip-of-trunk from here
(getting the bleeding edge), read on.

The basic steps needed to build libc++ are:

#. Checkout LLVM:

   * ``cd where-you-want-llvm-to-live``
   * ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/llvm/trunk llvm``

#. Checkout libc++:

   * ``cd where-you-want-llvm-to-live``
   * ``cd llvm/projects``
   * ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/libcxx/trunk libcxx``

#. Checkout libc++abi:

   * ``cd where-you-want-llvm-to-live``
   * ``cd llvm/projects``
   * ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/libcxxabi/trunk libcxxabi``

#. Configure and build libc++ with libc++abi:

   CMake is the only supported configuration system.

   Clang is the preferred compiler when building and using libc++.

   * ``cd where you want to build llvm``
   * ``mkdir build``
   * ``cd build``
   * ``cmake -G <generator> [options] <path to llvm sources>``

   For more information about configuring libc++ see :ref:`CMake Options`.

   * ``make cxx`` --- will build libc++ and libc++abi.
   * ``make check-cxx check-cxxabi`` --- will run the test suites.

   Shared libraries for libc++ and libc++ abi should now be present in llvm/build/lib.
   See :ref:`using an alternate libc++ installation <alternate libcxx>`

#. **Optional**: Install libc++ and libc++abi

   If your system already provides a libc++ installation it is important to be
   careful not to replace it. Remember Use the CMake option ``CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX`` to
   select a safe place to install libc++.

   * ``make install-cxx install-cxxabi`` --- Will install the libraries and the headers

   .. warning::
     * Replacing your systems libc++ installation could render the system non-functional.
     * Mac OS X will not boot without a valid copy of ``libc++.1.dylib`` in ``/usr/lib``.


The instructions are for building libc++ on
FreeBSD, Linux, or Mac using `libc++abi`_ as the C++ ABI library.
On Linux, it is also possible to use :ref:`libsupc++ <libsupcxx>` or libcxxrt.

It is sometimes beneficial to build outside of the LLVM tree. An out-of-tree
build would look like this:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ cd where-you-want-libcxx-to-live
  $ # Check out llvm, libc++ and libc++abi.
  $ ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/llvm/trunk llvm``
  $ ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/libcxx/trunk libcxx``
  $ ``svn co http://llvm.org/svn/llvm-project/libcxxabi/trunk libcxxabi``
  $ cd where-you-want-to-build
  $ mkdir build && cd build
  $ export CC=clang CXX=clang++
  $ cmake -DLLVM_PATH=path/to/llvm \
          -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libcxxabi \
          -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS=path/to/libcxxabi/include \
          path/to/libcxx
  $ make
  $ make check-libcxx # optional


Experimental Support for Windows
--------------------------------

The Windows support requires building with clang-cl as cl does not support one
required extension: `#include_next`.  Furthermore, VS 2015 or newer (19.00) is
required.  In the case of clang-cl, we need to specify the "MS Compatibility
Version" as it defaults to 2014 (18.00).

CMake + Visual Studio
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Building with Visual Studio currently does not permit running tests. However,
it is the simplest way to build.

.. code-block:: batch

  > cmake -G "Visual Studio 14 2015"              ^
          -T "LLVM-vs2014"                        ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED=YES              ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC=NO               ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_LIBRARY=NO ^
          \path\to\libcxx
  > cmake --build .

CMake + ninja
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Building with ninja is required for development to enable tests.
Unfortunately, doing so requires additional configuration as we cannot
just specify a toolset.

.. code-block:: batch

  > cmake -G Ninja                                                                    ^
          -DCMAKE_MAKE_PROGRAM=/path/to/ninja                                         ^
          -DCMAKE_SYSTEM_NAME=Windows                                                 ^
          -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang-cl                                                 ^
          -DCMAKE_C_FLAGS="-fms-compatibility-version=19.00 --target=i686--windows"   ^
          -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang-cl                                                ^
          -DCMAKE_CXX_FLAGS="-fms-compatibility-version=19.00 --target=i686--windows" ^
          -DLLVM_PATH=/path/to/llvm/tree                                              ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED=YES                                                  ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC=NO                                                   ^
          -DLIBCXX_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_LIBRARY=NO                                     ^
          \path\to\libcxx
  > /path/to/ninja cxx
  > /path/to/ninja check-cxx

Note that the paths specified with backward slashes must use the `\\` as the
directory separator as clang-cl may otherwise parse the path as an argument.

.. _`libc++abi`: http://libcxxabi.llvm.org/


.. _CMake Options:

CMake Options
=============

Here are some of the CMake variables that are used often, along with a
brief explanation and LLVM-specific notes. For full documentation, check the
CMake docs or execute ``cmake --help-variable VARIABLE_NAME``.

**CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE**:STRING
  Sets the build type for ``make`` based generators. Possible values are
  Release, Debug, RelWithDebInfo and MinSizeRel. On systems like Visual Studio
  the user sets the build type with the IDE settings.

**CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX**:PATH
  Path where LLVM will be installed if "make install" is invoked or the
  "INSTALL" target is built.

**CMAKE_CXX_COMPILER**:STRING
  The C++ compiler to use when building and testing libc++.


.. _libcxx-specific options:

libc++ specific options
-----------------------

.. option:: LIBCXX_INSTALL_LIBRARY:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Toggle the installation of the library portion of libc++.

.. option:: LIBCXX_INSTALL_HEADERS:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Toggle the installation of the libc++ headers.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build libc++ with assertions enabled.

.. option:: LIBCXX_BUILD_32_BITS:BOOL

  **Default**: ``OFF``

  Build libc++ as a 32 bit library. Also see `LLVM_BUILD_32_BITS`.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build libc++ as a shared library. Either `LIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED` or
  `LIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC` has to be enabled.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build libc++ as a static library. Either `LIBCXX_ENABLE_SHARED` or
  `LIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC` has to be enabled.

.. option:: LIBCXX_LIBDIR_SUFFIX:STRING

  Extra suffix to append to the directory where libraries are to be installed.
  This option overrides `LLVM_LIBDIR_SUFFIX`.

.. option:: LIBCXX_INSTALL_PREFIX:STRING

  **Default**: ``""``

  Define libc++ destination prefix.

.. option:: LIBCXX_HERMETIC_STATIC_LIBRARY:BOOL

  **Default**: ``OFF``

  Do not export any symbols from the static libc++ library. This is useful when
  This is useful when the static libc++ library is being linked into shared
  libraries that may be used in with other shared libraries that use different
  C++ library. We want to avoid avoid exporting any libc++ symbols in that case.

.. _libc++experimental options:

libc++experimental Specific Options
------------------------------------

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_LIBRARY:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build and test libc++experimental.a.

.. option:: LIBCXX_INSTALL_EXPERIMENTAL_LIBRARY:BOOL

  **Default**: ``LIBCXX_ENABLE_EXPERIMENTAL_LIBRARY AND LIBCXX_INSTALL_LIBRARY``

  Install libc++experimental.a alongside libc++.


.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_FILESYSTEM:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build filesystem as a standalone library libc++fs.a.

.. option:: LIBCXX_INSTALL_FILESYSTEM_LIBRARY:BOOL

  **Default**: ``LIBCXX_ENABLE_FILESYSTEM AND LIBCXX_INSTALL_LIBRARY``

  Install libc++fs.a alongside libc++.

.. _ABI Library Specific Options:

ABI Library Specific Options
----------------------------

.. option:: LIBCXX_CXX_ABI:STRING

  **Values**: ``none``, ``libcxxabi``, ``libcxxrt``, ``libstdc++``, ``libsupc++``.

  Select the ABI library to build libc++ against.

.. option:: LIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS:PATHS

  Provide additional search paths for the ABI library headers.

.. option:: LIBCXX_CXX_ABI_LIBRARY_PATH:PATH

  Provide the path to the ABI library that libc++ should link against.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC_ABI_LIBRARY:BOOL

  **Default**: ``OFF``

  If this option is enabled, libc++ will try and link the selected ABI library
  statically.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_ABI_LINKER_SCRIPT:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON`` by default on UNIX platforms other than Apple unless
  'LIBCXX_ENABLE_STATIC_ABI_LIBRARY' is ON. Otherwise the default value is ``OFF``.

  This option generate and installs a linker script as ``libc++.so`` which
  links the correct ABI library.

.. option:: LIBCXXABI_USE_LLVM_UNWINDER:BOOL

  **Default**: ``OFF``

  Build and use the LLVM unwinder. Note: This option can only be used when
  libc++abi is the C++ ABI library used.


libc++ Feature Options
----------------------

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_EXCEPTIONS:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build libc++ with exception support.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ENABLE_RTTI:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build libc++ with run time type information.

.. option:: LIBCXX_INCLUDE_BENCHMARKS:BOOL

  **Default**: ``ON``

  Build the libc++ benchmark tests and the Google Benchmark library needed
  to support them.

.. option:: LIBCXX_BENCHMARK_TEST_ARGS:STRING

  **Default**: ``--benchmark_min_time=0.01``

  A semicolon list of arguments to pass when running the libc++ benchmarks using the
  ``check-cxx-benchmarks`` rule. By default we run the benchmarks for a very short amount of time,
  since the primary use of ``check-cxx-benchmarks`` is to get test and sanitizer coverage, not to
  get accurate measurements.

.. option:: LIBCXX_BENCHMARK_NATIVE_STDLIB:STRING

  **Default**:: ``""``

  **Values**:: ``libc++``, ``libstdc++``

  Build the libc++ benchmark tests and Google Benchmark library against the
  specified standard library on the platform. On linux this can be used to
  compare libc++ to libstdc++ by building the benchmark tests against both
  standard libraries.

.. option:: LIBCXX_BENCHMARK_NATIVE_GCC_TOOLCHAIN:STRING

  Use the specified GCC toolchain and standard library when building the native
  stdlib benchmark tests.

.. option:: LIBCXX_HIDE_FROM_ABI_PER_TU_BY_DEFAULT:BOOL

  **Default**: ``OFF``

  Pick the default for whether to constrain ABI-unstable symbols to
  each individual translation unit. This setting controls whether
  `_LIBCPP_HIDE_FROM_ABI_PER_TU_BY_DEFAULT` is defined by default --
  see the documentation of that macro for details.


libc++ ABI Feature Options
--------------------------

The following options allow building libc++ for a different ABI version.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ABI_VERSION:STRING

  **Default**: ``1``

  Defines the target ABI version of libc++.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ABI_UNSTABLE:BOOL

  **Default**: ``OFF``

  Build the "unstable" ABI version of libc++. Includes all ABI changing features
  on top of the current stable version.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ABI_NAMESPACE:STRING

  **Default**: ``__n`` where ``n`` is the current ABI version.

  This option defines the name of the inline ABI versioning namespace. It can be used for building
  custom versions of libc++ with unique symbol names in order to prevent conflicts or ODR issues
  with other libc++ versions.

  .. warning::
    When providing a custom namespace, it's the users responsibility to ensure the name won't cause
    conflicts with other names defined by libc++, both now and in the future. In particular, inline
    namespaces of the form ``__[0-9]+`` are strictly reserved by libc++ and may not be used by users.
    Doing otherwise could cause conflicts and hinder libc++ ABI evolution.

.. option:: LIBCXX_ABI_DEFINES:STRING

  **Default**: ``""``

  A semicolon-separated list of ABI macros to persist in the site config header.
  See ``include/__config`` for the list of ABI macros.

.. _LLVM-specific variables:

LLVM-specific options
---------------------

.. option:: LLVM_LIBDIR_SUFFIX:STRING

  Extra suffix to append to the directory where libraries are to be
  installed. On a 64-bit architecture, one could use ``-DLLVM_LIBDIR_SUFFIX=64``
  to install libraries to ``/usr/lib64``.

.. option:: LLVM_BUILD_32_BITS:BOOL

  Build 32-bits executables and libraries on 64-bits systems. This option is
  available only on some 64-bits unix systems. Defaults to OFF.

.. option:: LLVM_LIT_ARGS:STRING

  Arguments given to lit.  ``make check`` and ``make clang-test`` are affected.
  By default, ``'-sv --no-progress-bar'`` on Visual C++ and Xcode, ``'-sv'`` on
  others.


Using Alternate ABI libraries
=============================


.. _libsupcxx:

Using libsupc++ on Linux
------------------------

You will need libstdc++ in order to provide libsupc++.

Figure out where the libsupc++ headers are on your system. On Ubuntu this
is ``/usr/include/c++/<version>`` and ``/usr/include/c++/<version>/<target-triple>``

You can also figure this out by running

.. code-block:: bash

  $ echo | g++ -Wp,-v -x c++ - -fsyntax-only
  ignoring nonexistent directory "/usr/local/include/x86_64-linux-gnu"
  ignoring nonexistent directory "/usr/lib/gcc/x86_64-linux-gnu/4.7/../../../../x86_64-linux-gnu/include"
  #include "..." search starts here:
  #include &lt;...&gt; search starts here:
  /usr/include/c++/4.7
  /usr/include/c++/4.7/x86_64-linux-gnu
  /usr/include/c++/4.7/backward
  /usr/lib/gcc/x86_64-linux-gnu/4.7/include
  /usr/local/include
  /usr/lib/gcc/x86_64-linux-gnu/4.7/include-fixed
  /usr/include/x86_64-linux-gnu
  /usr/include
  End of search list.

Note that the first two entries happen to be what we are looking for. This
may not be correct on other platforms.

We can now run CMake:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ CC=clang CXX=clang++ cmake -G "Unix Makefiles" \
    -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libstdc++ \
    -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS="/usr/include/c++/4.7/;/usr/include/c++/4.7/x86_64-linux-gnu/" \
    -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr \
    <libc++-source-dir>


You can also substitute ``-DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libsupc++``
above, which will cause the library to be linked to libsupc++ instead
of libstdc++, but this is only recommended if you know that you will
never need to link against libstdc++ in the same executable as libc++.
GCC ships libsupc++ separately but only as a static library.  If a
program also needs to link against libstdc++, it will provide its
own copy of libsupc++ and this can lead to subtle problems.

.. code-block:: bash

  $ make cxx
  $ make install

You can now run clang with -stdlib=libc++.


.. _libcxxrt_ref:

Using libcxxrt on Linux
------------------------

You will need to keep the source tree of `libcxxrt`_ available
on your build machine and your copy of the libcxxrt shared library must
be placed where your linker will find it.

We can now run CMake like:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ CC=clang CXX=clang++ cmake -G "Unix Makefiles" \
          -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libcxxrt \
          -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS=path/to/libcxxrt-sources/src \
                -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
                -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr \
                <libc++-source-directory>
  $ make cxx
  $ make install

Unfortunately you can't simply run clang with "-stdlib=libc++" at this point, as
clang is set up to link for libc++ linked to libsupc++.  To get around this
you'll have to set up your linker yourself (or patch clang).  For example,

.. code-block:: bash

  $ clang++ -stdlib=libc++ helloworld.cpp \
            -nodefaultlibs -lc++ -lcxxrt -lm -lc -lgcc_s -lgcc

Alternately, you could just add libcxxrt to your libraries list, which in most
situations will give the same result:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ clang++ -stdlib=libc++ helloworld.cpp -lcxxrt

.. _`libcxxrt`: https://github.com/pathscale/libcxxrt/


Using a local ABI library installation
---------------------------------------

.. warning::
  This is not recommended in almost all cases.

These instructions should only be used when you can't install your ABI library.

Normally you must link libc++ against a ABI shared library that the
linker can find.  If you want to build and test libc++ against an ABI
library not in the linker's path you needq to set
``-DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_LIBRARY_PATH=/path/to/abi/lib`` when configuring CMake.

An example build using libc++abi would look like:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ CC=clang CXX=clang++ cmake \
              -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI=libc++abi  \
              -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_INCLUDE_PATHS="/path/to/libcxxabi/include" \
              -DLIBCXX_CXX_ABI_LIBRARY_PATH="/path/to/libcxxabi-build/lib" \
               path/to/libcxx
  $ make

When testing libc++ LIT will automatically link against the proper ABI
library.
